Government Mechanisms for Platform Boundary Resource Tuning: The case of China’s National Open Innovation Platforms for AI

Benjamin Cedric Larsen1,2
1Copenhagen Business School, Department of International Economics, Government and Business Porcelænshaven 24A, DK- 2000 Frederiksberg, 2Sino-Danish Center for Education and Research (SDC), Niels Jensens Vej 2, Building 1190 DK-8000 Aarhus C, Denmark.

Abstract
The role of digital platforms in the economy has grown substantially over the last decade. Few studies, however, have engaged with the wider platform literature to understand the mechanisms that governments have at their disposal to enable or constrain platform governance and associated forms of digital innovation. This paper provides a case study of China’s National Open Innovation Platforms for Artificial Intelligence to illustrate how actors from the public sector engage in boundary resource tuning associated with leading AI open innovation platforms in China. The paper offers two key contributions. First, it extends existing theory on boundary resources by elaborating on a range of government mechanisms that may be used to affect the generativity of platforms in areas such as data, software, and interoperability. Second, conceptual clarity is added to how governments may use such mechanisms to orchestrate the platform economy, which has implications for policymakers and managers.

Keywords: Artificial Intelligence; Platform Innovation; Governance; Boundary Resources; Government Mechanisms; Hybrid Platforms; China
JEL codes: L22 (Firm Organization and Market Structure), L52 (Industrial Policy • Sectoral Planning Methods), O36 (Open Innovation), P30 (Socialist Institutions and Their Transitions)

1.	Introduction
Innovation platforms have long been an area of research due to their transformative organizational and technological capabilities, as well as how these serve as conduits for digital innovation (Constantinides et al., 2018; De Reuver, Sørensen and Basole, 2018; Gawer and Cusumano, 2013; Jacobides et al., 2018; Yoo et al., 2012). In recent years, governments have also started to engage in a platform induced way of thinking and organization, which has been summarized in literatures surrounding E-government (Janssen et al., 2009; Ju et al., 2019), Government as a Platform (Brown et al., 2017; Cordella & Paletti, 2019) as well as Big Data and Open Government Data initiatives (Klievink et al., 2017; Zhao & Fan, 2018), among others. While most of these studies concentrate on platform-induced ways of public value creation or optimization, few studies engage with the wider platform literature to understand how governments enable or constrain platform governance and associated forms of digital innovation.
This paper draws on existing management and information systems literature concerning digital platforms (Baldwin & Woodard, 2009; Cusumano, Gawer, & Yoffie, 2019; Ghazawneh & Henfridsson, 2013) to understand how governments affect platform governance and generativity. Generativity is defined as the ‘capacity to produce unprompted change driven by large, varied and uncoordinated audiences’ (Zittrain, 2006, p. 1980). 
While studies have tried to bridge platform governance approaches from both the public and the private sector perspectives (see, e.g., Bonina & Eaton, 2020; Klievink et al., 2016), most studies treat platform governance as separate from policies and regulations. 
Platform governance is most often associated with the dynamics that are present when private sector firms seek to orchestrate their boundary resources, which explains how a platform governs the generative relationship between its core and ecosystem members at the periphery (Ghazawneh & Henfridsson, 2013). 
The role of digital platforms in the economy has grown substantially over the last decade, while governments have been struggling to devise new ways of addressing the growing power and reach of platforms. This is, for example, seen in terms of social media platforms' governance of information or in a growing number of antitrust cases associated with digital and platform-based competition and market concentration (Nooren et al., 2018). National control over digital information infrastructure and underlying hardware and software components are also areas that have received increasing attention from governments around the world. These areas are often linked to the notion of digital sovereignty, which refers to “the control of data, software (e.g., AI), standards and protocols (e.g., 5G, domain names), processes (e.g., cloud computing), hardware (e.g., mobile phones), services (e.g., social media, e-commerce), and infrastructures (e.g., cables, satellites, smart cities)” (Floridi, 2020, p. 370). In extension, digital sovereignty translates into a desire to retain national control over digital forms of innovation and infrastructure, including their generativity.
The United States, Europe, and China have all stressed the importance of digital sovereignty and retaining domestic control over data and AI innovation. These events have spurred new debate over the role of the government in affecting strategic digital resources such as data and software, which has important implications for the governance of innovation platforms. Contextual issues relate to how a government supports digital innovation in strategic domains (e.g., AI, Cloud Computing, 5G) or how digital markets (e.g., for software and hardware) are enabled or constrained in accordance with key national objectives. In terms of AI innovation, growing disparities between large platforms and smaller SMEs regarding access to crucial inputs such as data and compute are also on the agenda of governments. The mechanisms at the governments' disposal to affect digital innovation, competition, and sovereignty are often separated from how platforms govern their boundary resources, i.e., the generative relationship between core and periphery (Ghazawneh & Henfridsson, 2013). Existing literature has been slow to deal with the growing interactions among governments and platforms and how policies and regulations affect platform organization, including the orchestration of digital innovation. To address these concerns while highlighting the importance of aspects related to domestic governance of data, software, and interoperability, the research questions of this paper ask: what mechanisms do governments use to affect the boundary resources of innovation platforms, and what does it mean for platform governance? 
Platform theory from strategic management and information systems concerning platform architecture, ecosystem, and governance is applied to address the research question. Adopting this theoretical perspective has several strengths. First, it provides new light on the role of varying actors across public and private settings and how they jointly impact platform innovation and governance. Second, it explains the distinct mechanisms and rules, and tools used by public and private actors, respectively, and how these enable or constrain platform generativity. Finally, it enables a more granular assessment of differing national and strategic approaches to platform innovation and governance. 
The case of China’s National Open Innovation Platforms for AI has been chosen to illustrate how a government can affect the boundary resources of innovation platforms. The policy was implemented in 2017 to strengthen China’s indigenous AI open-source and open data ecosystem. The case is illustrated through interview-based data and secondary sources that describe the changing relationship between a platform's private boundary resources and how China’s central government can affect the process of boundary resource tuning, both directly and indirectly. An analysis is centered on how China’s central government seeks to change the relationship between private platform governance and public sector orchestration and value creation.  
Two key contributions are provided. First, the theory on boundary resources is extended, emphasizing the role of the government in affecting the process of platform generativity. In doing so, a new framework for understanding the mechanisms associated with government-induced boundary resource tuning is offered. This results in theory building that reorients the concept of boundary resource tuning from the role of private platforms and governance processes towards the interacting mechanisms that governments use to orchestrate digital aspects of innovation and rule-setting in the platform economy. The second set of contributions is related to practice with several implications for policymakers and managers. 
The following section introduces background on platforms and ecosystems and previous research on boundary resources (Ghazawneh & Henfridsson, 2013). Next, the case study is introduced, followed by an outline of the methodological approach of the research. This is followed by an analysis of government-induced boundary resource tuning in the presented case. A discussion breaks down a set of concrete government mechanisms for boundary resource tuning, which marks the theoretical contribution. Next, a set of practical implications for research and policymakers, and managers are offered. At last, limitations and directions for future research are presented.
2.	Background and Previous Research
Research on platforms tends to divide these into 1) transaction platforms, e.g., e-commerce, and 2) innovation platforms, e.g., apps and services (Bonina, Koskinen, Eaton, & Gawer, 2021; Cusumano, Gawer, & Yoffie, 2019). Transaction platforms act as intermediaries between two or more groups of agents, for example, as multi-sided platforms (MSP) that organize economic transactions (Hagiu & Wright, 2015). Examples include app stores, e-commerce platforms, dating platforms, and social media platforms. Innovation platforms emphasize the “foundations upon which other firms can build complementary products, services or technologies” (Gawer, 2009, p. 54). The technical architecture of an innovation platform contains modules, or building blocks, that represent ‘accessible innovative capabilities’ (Gawer, 2014). These modules can be accessed and combined by app developers (complementors) to build apps and services (known as platform complements) (Bonina et al., 2021). Innovation platforms are usually characterized by having platform owners (Boudreau & Hagiu, 2009) responsible for governing the innovation of modules in the core architecture and the innovation activities of third-party developers at the periphery (Bonina & Eaton, 2020). 
The relationship between core and periphery is often contextualized through the notion of ecosystems. Ecosystems comprise the platform’s sponsor and complement providers that make the platform more valuable to consumers (Ceccagnoli, Forman, Huang, & Wu, 2012; Gawer & Cusumano, 2013). Platform ecosystems take a “hub and spoke” form, with an array of peripheral firms connected to the central platform via shared or open-source technologies and technical standards, e.g., application programming interfaces (API) and software development kits (SDK). By connecting to the platform, complementors can generate complementary innovation and gain access to other members or costumers of the platform’s broader ecosystem (Ceccagnoli et al., 2012; Cennamo & Santalo, 2013). Accordingly, platform ecosystems can be seen as “semi-regulated marketplaces” that foster entrepreneurial action under the coordination and direction of the platform sponsor (Wareham, Fox, & Giner, 2014, p. 1211). 
Since platform creation draws on collaborative value creation rather than competition  (Osterwalder & Pigneur, 2010), innovation platforms are often associated with open innovation. Open innovation is defined as “the use of purposive inflows and outflows of knowledge to accelerate internal innovation and expand the markets for external use of innovation” (Chesbrough, 2006, p. 1). Similarly, open data and open-source software (OSS) are often associated with open innovation platforms since their “free” redistribution of public goods attracts complementors from the ecosystem to the platform. Private companies may choose to adopt open source software for reasons such as reduced costs of adoption (Marsan et al., 2012), strategic considerations (Ceccagnoli et al., 2012), as well as a general desire to innovate (Bouras et al., 2014). Research on organizing open-source software development for generating external software contributions (Von Hippel & Von Krogh, 2003) has been tightly knit with platform ownership and governance. 
2.1.	 Platform governance through boundary resources
In relation to platform governance, Ghazawneh & Henfridsson (2010) developed the theory of boundary resources to explain how platforms govern the inherent tension between openness and control. Boundary resources evolve through governance of the production function, which refers to the rules and tools that are used to address and constrain or enable the generativity of ecosystems (Eaton et al., 2015; Ghazawneh & Henfridsson, 2010; Henfridsson & Bygstad, 2013; Yoo, Henfridsson, & Lyytinen, 2010). 
Ghazawneh & Henfridsson (2013) further developed the concepts of resourcing and securing, referring to the “software tools and regulations that serve as the interface for the arms-length relationship between the platform owner and the application developer” (Ghazawneh & Henfridsson, 2013, p. 174).  Resourcing is the process by which the scope and diversity of a platform is enhanced, which contributes to expand the ecosystem of actors around the platform by securing the supply of new resources, knowledge, and capabilities (Iansiti & Levien, 2004). Examples of tools are APIs and SDKs that give developers access to the modular core of the platform and enable them to build software services. Securing is the process by which the platform's control is increased and contributes to governing a community of third-party developers. Platform integrity is maintained by providing rules for controlling the quality of third-party apps and services developed for the platform. One example of rules is those established by software and data licensing agreements (Boudreau & Hagiu, 2009). If rules are broken, the platform owner can take a range of actions, such as suspending a developer from using or accessing the platform (Bonina & Eaton, 2020). In combination, resourcing tools and securing rules act as key components of platform governance (Ghazawneh & Henfridsson, 2013). 
Since Ghazawneh & Henfridsson (2010) proposed their theory on boundary resources, several studies have expanded on their research. Most of these are found in the information systems and management literatures and tend to be based on case studies that analyze how a specific platform governs its boundary resources, i.e., relationship to third parties at the periphery. 
For instance, Bianco et al. (2014) add the notion of social boundary resources that transfer knowledge between the platform and developers through processes such as registering and coordination. Myllärniemi et al. (2018) find that boundary resources may influence developers’ choice of software frameworks, meaning that the design of a platform's boundary resources (e.g., degree of openness) has an impact on the developer’s experience to support or hinder the adaption of a particular software framework. Karhu et al. (2018) study Google’s Android platform to understand the concept of platform forking, which describes how a hostile firm bypasses a host’s controlling boundary resources to exploit a platform’s shared resources and create a competing competition platform business. 
In studying Apple’s iOS service system,  (2015) argues that Ghazawneh and Henfridsson's (2013) model is based on a simplistic dialectic relationship between an infrastructure owner and third-party developers at the periphery. However, this model neglects the reality that other actors also hold varying forms of power over a platforms’ boundary resources. By drawing on the theoretical framework of tuning (Pickering, 1993; Barrett et al., 2012), Eaton et al. (2015) describe how the co-creative and distributed dynamics of boundary resources evolve in a network of heterogeneous actors that are dealing with multiple interdependent technological artifacts. The boundary resource theory is moved from a dialectic view between a platform owner and third-party developers to a “distributed network view of actors and artifacts that are intermingled in multilayered, overlapping, and ongoing tuning processes” (Eaton et al., 2015. p. 221). In this process, human actors “seek to channel material agency to shape the actions of other human agents” (Jones, 1998. p. 297), and, as a result, boundary resources evolve and emerge. In the distributed view of boundary resource tuning, actors include developer organizations of all sizes, other boundary resource owners, user communities, regulators, partner organizations, or the public opinion, e.g., as expressed in online forums. The distributed tuning of boundary resources is simultaneously and inseparably political and material.  
While Eaton et al. 's (2015) model include external actors, few concrete examples of the rules and tools, i.e., mechanisms at their disposal, are offered. This means that the role of external actors in boundary resource tuning remains little understood and accounted for in the literature. Indeed, most studies that research a platform’s boundary resources tend to focus on technical details of platform-specific case studies situated in a western context without paying much attention to the role of the institutional environment in which the platform is situated. The role of external actors and how their varying forms of pressure affect the process of boundary resource tuning is, therefore, an understudied phenomenon. 
More recently, the role of government platforms such as Open Government Data (OGD) platforms has started to receive more attention in the literature. For example, Bonina and Eaton (2020) have researched OGD platforms in Latin America and have shifted attention towards the role of the government in formulating and shaping proprietary platform boundary resources. This has resulted in extending platform literature by incorporating a supply-side view where ministries and other public offices contribute datasets to the OGD platform core. On the supply side, informational tools include dataset templates and social tools such as initiatives that encourage ministries and developers to engage in service innovation on the OGD platform. In terms of securing, contractual rules specify the format and quality of datasets supplied to the platform. Theoretically, these findings complement existing views of the demand side where peripheral entrepreneurs and developers engage with data to build tertiary apps and services. On the demand side, Bonina and Eaton (2020) find that the OGD platform owner uses informational tools (e.g., datasets and manuals), software tools (e.g., APIs and web portals), and social tools (e.g., hackathons and competitions) to resource developers. The platform owner also adopts securing rules such as licenses and conditions to govern how developers use datasets while ensuring that the platform is not abused.
 
Fig. 1. A governance model for open government data platform ecosystem cultivation (Bonina & Eaton, 2020).
However, the role of policies and the institutional environment in which a platform is situated is generally treated as contextual factors external to the process of boundary resource tuning. In the distributed view of boundary resources (Eaton et al., 2015), contextual factors such as organizational forms, open data policies, and open government policies link and enable functioning tools and rules to emerge (Bonina & Eaton, 2020), while little explanation is given to the mechanisms that guide this process. 
Existing literature’s shortcomings in addressing the role of the government in enabling or constraining the tuning processes that are associated with a platforms boundary resources motivates the research question of this paper, which asks: what mechanisms do governments use to affect the boundary resources of innovation platforms, and what does it mean for platform governance? In other words, how do policies, legislation, and regulations, e.g., under different national and geographic conditions, affect the boundary resources of platforms, and what does it mean for platform governance and innovation? 
The size and international reach of some innovation platforms and the importance of their underlying information infrastructure, e.g., in terms of national security and digital sovereignty, prompt governments to devise new ways to affect the process of boundary resource tuning (Panchenko et al., 2020). However, the varying ways and strategies that governments devise in affecting the generativity of domestic or regional platforms and information infrastructures and the constraints placed on these remain little studied. 
Huhtamäki et al. (2017) are one of few studies that incorporate the geographical angle associated with platforms’ boundary resources by looking at the global API ecosystem. The authors suggest that the process of international platform governance should include four categories related to cross-country data governance (e.g., country restrictions on data residency), governance of mash-ups (e.g., country restrictions on the combination of digital services), governance related to technology use (e.g., country restrictions on technologies), and governance-related to API management, i.e., how to control, manage, distribute, and define APIs and their terms of service for global (public) use. These considerations may provide an additional layer to policy-related contextual factors associated with boundary resource tuning by providing context on platform design choices and how these may be impacted by policies that differ across geographical and legal borders. 
Given our focus on National Open Innovation Platforms for AI, Huhtamäki et al. s. (2017) proposed categories are re-purposed around 1) data governance (i.e., availability), 2) AI open source software governance (i.e., accessibility), and 3) international integration (i.e., interoperability), with an emphasis on how governments seek to affect and orchestrate the boundary resources associated with each of these dimensions.
Incorporating the geographical angle into the study of boundary resources includes paying attention to how platforms govern and structure their boundary resources domestically and globally and how varying national contexts, policies, and regulations may affect a platform's terms of operation differently. A platform’s operation is usually contingent on regional or national characteristics of digital innovation, such as data, labor, software, and hardware availability and accessibility on the input side, as well as laws and regulations that govern its diffusion and terms of global interoperability on the output side.  
Based on these considerations, this paper seeks to shift the view of traditional boundary resources associated with a platform's core and periphery towards embedding how varying mechanisms and forms of rulemaking, which may be extant to the core architecture of a platform, nonetheless can have direct implications for its process of boundary resource tuning. In this government-centered view of boundary resource tuning, threats or opportunities to platform control are no longer merely associated with competition by other boundary resource owners or third parties at the periphery. However, they are directly associated with varying government actors and these policies and regulatory agendas for the digital economy. 
In answering the research question, the paper draws on the case of China’s National Open Innovation Platforms for AI. This case is interesting for three reasons. First, it takes a public sector perspective on the role of boundary resource tuning as opposed to previous literature, which is heavily centered on individual case studies of private sector platform governance. Second, unlike most existing research, it studies platform governance outside of a western context. The focus on China is interesting since the market structure and governing mechanisms are different from that of a liberal market economy. In the area of platform governance and control, the mechanisms China’s central government utilizes to influence platform boundary resources could look very different from the mechanisms and tools used in a western context, for instance. Due to the growing role of the digital economy, it is important to understand what these differences could mean in terms of domestic and international forms of platform governance and digital interoperability. Third and last, the National Open Innovation Platforms for AI initiative displays hybrid platform elements that have been little researched but arguably are of growing importance to the digital economy, for example, in areas associated with AI innovation and standardization. 
3.	Methods
3.1.	Research Setting
Since 2017 China has engaged in a large state-led push for indigenous development of artificial intelligence. Chinese policymakers have sought to close perceived gaps in the development of AI-related to basic theory, core algorithms, key equipment, and high-end computer chips (Xinhua, 2017) by actively supporting the formation of more open ecosystems for AI innovation. The scope of supporting AI technologies is linked to upgrading existing patterns of production as well as public service delivery.
In 2017 China’s State Council released the AI Development Plan, which is a detailed national strategy for turning China into a world leader in AI by 2030 (Roberts et al., 2021). Later in 2017, China’s Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) issued the policy “National Open Innovation Platforms for New Generation Artificial Intelligence,” which at the time endorsed four private-sector technology companies to construct National Open Innovation Platforms for AI (NOIPAI). In 2019, MOST expanded the initiative to fifteen National Open Innovation Platforms for AI and released “Guidelines for the Construction of the National New Generation of Artificial Intelligence Open Innovation Platforms” (MOST, 2019). The guidelines detail that NOIPAI’s are to be constructed by enterprises that have revealed leading capabilities in AI. 
According to the policy plan and guidelines, the technology companies behind National Open Innovation Platforms for AI are expected to deliver results on (1) research and development, (2) ecosystem participation, (3) sharing data and open-source software (OSS), as well as (4) supporting the entrepreneurship of small and medium-sized enterprises (Wu et al., 2020). 
The fifteen National Open Innovation Platforms for AI are based on application-driven, enterprise-led, and market-oriented principles (Wu et al., 2020). MOST has further specified that platform leaders are expected to advance their AI areas in close collaboration with local governments, industry participants, as well as research institutes and universities (MOST 2019). 
Table 1. Overview of the fifteen National Open Innovation Platforms for AI.
Company	National Open Innovation Platform for AI (2017)
Baidu	Autonomous Driving
Alibaba	Smart City
Tencent	Medical Imaging
iFlytek	Smart Audio
SenseTime	Smart Vision (added September 2018)
Added August 2019
YiTu	Vision Computing
Mininglamp	Smart Marketing
Huawei	Software / Hardware
Ping'An	Inclusive Finance
HIK Vision	Video Perception
JD.com	Smart Supply Chain
Megvii	Image Perception
360 Qihoo	Cybersecurity
Tal Education	Smart Education
Xiaomi	Smart Home

The companies behind NOIPAI are asked to submit annual progress reports to MOST, while the Ministry has declared that it will actively support the construction of National Open Innovation Platforms for AI. During this process, provincial Science and Technology authorities have been mandated to assist in the promotion of NOIPAI through the provision of relevant policy support contingent on regional characteristics of development (MOST 2019). Although unspecified, channels for support include public procurement, local government initiatives, partnerships, and access to government data. How the companies choose to build their NOIPAI is little specified, however, and the architecture of the individual platforms is left with the companies. Common for all NOIPAI is that they provide open-source materials, such as open data, algorithms, open-source frameworks, as well as SDKs and API’s for the ecosystem to connect and engage with.
3.2.	 Methodology
This study undertakes an explorative case analysis of China’s National Open Innovation Platforms for AI. A case study is an appropriate method for studying new and emerging phenomena (Eisenhardt, 1989; Yin, 2003) and is especially suitable for exploring complex processes such as open innovation in an emerging technology paradigm (Birkinshaw, Brannen, & Tung, 2011, p. 575). A case study is a useful method to develop theory inductively, grounded in empirical data (Eisenhardt 1989). A grounded approach to theory building is considered relevant when little is known about a phenomenon, which provides an opportunity for theory to be developed inductively, grounded in empirical data (Eisenhardt 1989). Grounded theory is therefore considered an appropriate methodological approach to uncover a set of underlying processes inherent to the substantive area of inquiry (Tie et al., 2019).
Deploying a broad view on the formation of National Open Innovation Platforms for AI and governing processes and how these are shared among several actors increases the rigor through which knowledge of National Open Innovation Platforms for AI can be inferred (Nachum, 2012). It also enables a more precise means for identifying government mechanisms that influence the boundary resources of the initiative. 
The case of National Open Innovation Platforms for AI was chosen because of its relevance to informing how public actors can influence innovation platforms' process of boundary resource tuning. Furthermore, the initiative resembles a new model of public-private platform orchestration that has been little studied but is of importance to the governance of platform-based organizational settings at the intersection of public and private interests going forward. 
3.3.	Data collection 
Data includes primary data of 16 semi-structured interviews collected during 2018 and 2019, in which timeframe the author was located in China. Interviews involve key stakeholders that are directly or indirectly engaged in the National Open Innovation Platforms initiative. Respondents include CEOs, directors, and managers from domestic and international technology companies and AI start-ups located and operating in China, and software engineers and developers directly engaged in building and maintaining AI platforms. 
The interviews consist of open-ended questions focusing on AI innovation in China and the role of National Open Innovation Platforms for AI. A list of interview questions is included in Appendix A. All of the interviews were conducted in English, although the presence of a translator was offered on some occasions.  
Direct access to policymakers with responsibilities in NOIPAI could not be established. The reasons for this may be several, such as the sensitive nature of industrial policies in China related to emerging technology paradigms.
Secondary data relies on policy documents regarding the support of AI across national and regional levels. The documents were retrieved using a keyword search on three primary sources, including (1) the website of the Chinese State Council (http://www.gov.cn/), providing access to all types of government policy documents (e.g., plans, opinions, notices); and (2), the websites of several ministries and commissions (e.g., MOST;  http://www.most.gov.cn/); and (3), reports on the development of AI in China across industry and academia (see, e.g., Rho, Lee, & Kim, 2015; Xue, 2018). 
Additional secondary sources include online resources on platform infrastructure, which in many cases are publicly disclosed by the companies constructing NOIPAI. Data from interviewees have been triangulated with these documentary resources.
A special focus on secondary analysis of publicly available data, such as press releases, tech blogs, and developer forums, is considered a viable approach to studying platform-based phenomena as great levels of secrecy usually surrounds major platform owners. This makes reliable first-hand data on governance and design decisions hard to come by (De Reuver et al., 2018). Therefore, excerpts from public interviews and presentations by key stakeholders and related news coverage in English and Mandarin have been included as secondary sources. At last, extensive participation in AI conferences across academia and industry was conducted in China on an ongoing basis throughout 2018 and 2019.
Table 2. Overview of interview data sources.
 	Organization	Position	Informant Code	Interview mins	Interview N
NOIPAI	1 - Baidu	Manager	1NOIP1	24	1
	2 - Alibaba	Developer	1NOIP2	82	2
	3 - Tencent	Developer	1NOIP3	51	1
	4 - SenseTime	Director	1NOIP4	33	1
	5 - JD 	Manager	1NOIP5	126	2
					
Domestic Tech-Firms	6 - DiDi	Director	2DTF1	97	1
	7 - VIPSHOP	Director	2DTF2	25	1
	8 - Gridsum	Director	2DTF3	65	1
	9 - Xiaoai	President	2DTF4	44	1
					
Domestic AI start-ups	10 - Trio.ai	CEO	3AIST1	75	1
	11 - Meezao	Founder	3AIST2	97	1
					
International Tech-Firms	12 - Microsoft	Director	4ITF1	55	1
	13 - Oracle	Manager	4ITF2	89	1
 	14 - AI Technology Center	Co-founder	4ITF3	123	1
TOTAL	 	 	 	986	16

3.4.	Data analysis 
Each dataset was analyzed to answer the research question: what mechanisms do governments use to affect the boundary resources of innovation platforms, and what does it mean for platform governance? The aim of the data analysis was to identify and inductively classify government mechanisms for boundary resource tuning.
Most interviews were recorded and transcribed, while some were conducted in note-form due to the collected data's sensitivity or concern for the respondent's anonymity. The interviews have been coded with the software NVivo version 12. 
The first round of coding aimed at identifying platform boundary resources (i.e., tools and rules) in an inductive fashion (Strauss & Corbin, 1998). The aim of the first round of coding included tracing the underlying policy- and firm- justifications for establishing and engaging in the construction of National Open Innovation Platform for AI. This step focused on how the platform owner devised rules and tools to govern the relationship between platform core and periphery and how and why the government sought to influence this process. The purpose of this initial coding process was to fracture the data and compare justifications for engaging in the NOIPAI initiative across public and private interests while looking for similarities and differences in the beginning patterns of the data (Strauss & Corbin, 1998). After the initial analysis of the coded material, theoretical sampling was employed to further direct additional data collection (Mills et al., 2014).
In the second coding round, first-order codes were clustered into more abstract second-order codes that synthesized how the perceived government interactions influenced platform boundary resources. A few core categories emerged at this stage and were subsequently formed into more concrete concepts and relationships surrounding a co-dependent form of boundary resource tuning. This refined first-order codes and paved the way for a more fine-grained categorization of government mechanisms for boundary resource tuning to emerge. An example of this process can be seen in Table 3.  
Since policy documents often lack explicit details regarding the actual infrastructure requirements of National Open Innovation Platforms for AI and concrete measures such as funding, the paper's analysis takes a governance-oriented approach to outlining mechanisms of boundary resource tuning. In doing so, the structural implications of the platforms, and the varying kinds of partnerships with policymakers, local governments, and businesses, are all considered. The interaction between public and private actors and the mechanisms for interaction and joint platform governance have received special attention throughout the analysis.  

	
Table 3. Example of the interview data and coding procedure.
Empirical data	First-order coding	Second-order coding
"Universities do not have a product team, so there is no way for them to reach end-users” [4ITF1]
	Lack of resources in public-sector research	Cooperation 
"In China, the government […] want this ecosystem to grow faster because they have realized that they absolutely need it” [4ITF3]
	The goal is to make the domestic AI ecosystem grow faster 	Communication
The companies behind National Open Innovation Platforms for AI are required to submit annual progress reports to the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST 2019)
	Legal obligation to report on progress	Contract
“Google and Facebook are not in China so we can hardly access their platform” [2DTF2]	Access to international resources restricted
	Interoperability
“Most large companies have a special legal VPN so that they can access Google and things like that” [1NOIP2]. 	Access to international resources increased through legal VPN
	Software
“The big knowledge bases like UMLS are not completely adapted to China yet, so there is infrastructural work to do” [4ITF3].
	Digital AI resources still need to be developed in some areas 	Infrastructure 
“The size and the underdeveloped rural areas, so you could use lots of things in telemedicine and bringing better diagnosis” [4ITF3]. 
	New solutions needed to combat social problems	Organizational
“Government data often remains siloed across legacy institutions with limited access” [2DTF3]
	Government data is a restricted resource	Data
“We cooperate with local governments, we offer them big data analytics, just like cloud and smart transportation” [2DTF1].	Local governments buy and adopt AI solutions	Procurement

4.	Findings
The findings of this section cover platform rules and tools, and government mechanisms, which collectively inform and shape the boundary resources of National Open Innovation Platforms for AI. Special attention has been placed on National Open Innovation Platforms’ organization around data governance (i.e., availability), AI open source software governance (i.e., accessibility), international integration (i.e., interoperability), and how government actors seek to affect and orchestrate boundary resources associated with each of these dimensions. At last, the findings include a set of hybrid platform elements adjacent to but interrelated with the NOIPAI initiative. These have important implications for platform governance.  
4.1.	Platform rules and tools 
As clarified in policy plans such as China’s AI Development Plan (2017), China’s central government aims to establish greater self-sufficiency, making domestic open source projects a vital development area. An open-source White Paper released by the China AI Open-Source Software Development League in 2018 notes that: “In the development history of AI Open Source Software, due to the relatively limited participation of China, the current situation of the AI Open Source Software market is dominated by Western developed countries” (AOSS, 2018 p. 1051). A commentary positions that “China’s AI open source community and technological innovation ecosystem are comparatively lagging, [and] the strength of technology platform construction needs to be reinforced. [China should] construct an independent and controllable innovation ecosystem” (Hickert & Ding, 2018, p. 1) 
Regarding resourcing, National Open Innovation Platforms for AI contribute to open source an extended range of information- (e.g., data) and software tools (e.g., deep learning frameworks). Companies endorsed to build NOIPAI have pledged to open their computing and data platforms and allow developers from the ecosystem to improve their AI capabilities based on released open-source materials. This means that private sector platforms in the initiative are under obligation to restructure their boundary resources to increase data availability and AI open-source software accessibility.
Huawei has, for example, been endorsed to build a National Open Innovation Platform for Full Stack Development of Software and Hardware and has, through its Cloud ModelArts platform, begun to open up for the entire AI value chain from data processing to model development, model training, and model deployment, while open-sourcing its MindSpore deep learning framework (China Daily, 2019). All of these are resourcing tools that are opened up for members of Huawei’s ecosystem. Other companies have also open-sourced their deep learning frameworks and made these accessible on their NOIPAI, e.g., Baidu’s PaddlePaddle, Alibaba’s XDL, SenseTime’s Parrots, and Megvii’s MegEngine. Deep learning frameworks are essential for AI development as these are considered building blocks for designing, training, and validating deep neural networks through high-level APIs.
For small and medium-sized enterprises, resources such as data and AI open-source software accessibility means that they “need not start from zero. [They] can start from these platforms because they have already invested a lot. [This means that SMEs] can jump to a higher level [of innovation] and they can concentrate on the business logic level, the application level” [2DTF2].
The rationale for companies to engage in the process of providing deep learning frameworks and other software as open-source, however, remains “similar to any other big tech company. […] sometimes something turns out to be useful and a chance to attract people or to make some PR, or it gets people closer and makes people use your services” [1NOIP2], which creates network effects and has a positive effect on innovation. Regardless of the National Open Innovation Platform for AI status, private sector innovation platforms already have market-based incentives for engaging in boundary resource tuning that opens their platforms and increases data availability (informational tools) and open-source accessibility (software tools) for its members. In other words, greater availability of resourcing tools is a chance to attract complementors to the platform, enhancing its ecosystem's value. 
In terms of opening data on NOIPAI, i.e., increasing availability, an interviewee notes that “data is shared as soon it will benefit [the platforms]” [1NOIP2]. Since there are no official requirements for how data and frameworks should be opened and released on NOIPAI, the question of “how data is shared” remains a strategic company decision that is associated with a platform's unique strategy of boundary resource tuning. This means that the companies behind NOIPAI generally control all technological interfaces regarding which parts of the platform and technology are “opened” or stay “closed.” 
4.2.	Government Mechanisms
In the policy plans behind NOIPAI, a core focus is placed on R&D and close collaboration between companies, research institutes, and universities. An interviewee clarifies that “[previously] China was really concentrating on the low hanging fruits, on the newest technologies and then copying of the American models. AI researchers […] they concentrated less on the technology that will be relevant in three years. That's the weakness” [4ITF1]. Another interviewee notes that “we try to do something for the application level, but in the algorithm or the foundation level, the Chinese are still weak” [2DTF2]. 
Research in AI is often contingent on having access to large amounts of data and compute, which means that perceived asymmetries in access to resources between public research institutes and private innovation platforms are likely to persist. 
In China, policymakers, therefore, seek to create more significant synergies between public and private forms of R&D. At the same time, National Open Innovation Platforms for AI serve as a mechanism to enhance the cooperation of algorithmic research conducted in universities, with AI solutions that are applied in the private sector. “Universities do not have a product team, so there is no way for them to reach end-users [and to collect their data]” [4ITF1], which is a necessary input factor for AI innovation. Direct collaboration with universities provides the educational system with access to more data, while companies not limited to NOIPAI gain greater access to research capabilities. “We have corporations with several universities […] they have a good engine, but they need the data. And for us, we have the data and we would not have such a big research team. So that's why we could find a very good point to cooperate” [2DTF2]. While encouraging cooperative behavior may not directly impact the core of the open innovation platform, it does affect behavior at the periphery through incentivizing greater engagement between the platform core and public research institutes. The knowledge generated based on such cooperation may feed back into the functionality of the core, which affects the resources provided on the open innovation platform over time. As the government seeks to bring diverse actors together, they indirectly affect China’s domestic AI ecosystem's boundary resources by encouraging cooperative behavior at the periphery. 
Official reasons for establishing National Open Innovation Platforms for AI rest on their perceived ability to speed-up technological upgrading. “In China, the government […] want this ecosystem to grow faster because they have realized that they absolutely need it” [4ITF3]. During this process, policymakers encourage open ecosystems where data availability and deep learning frameworks are open-sourced and made more accessible. Even though some start-ups feel threatened by large platform integrators [3AIST2], the core idea is to empower more SMEs to become more innovative by providing greater access to open-source materials. Therefore, the National Platform emblem exemplifies a communication mechanism or a discursive tool used to endorse a few selected private sector platforms to build open-innovation environments. The communication mechanism signals that AI open-source developments are officially endorsed as a fruitful direction for the industry to move in. 
National Open Innovation Platforms for AI are also obligated to report on progress made in relation to R&D, the distribution of data and open-source software, and how that benefits ecosystem participation and SME-related innovation. This exemplifies a contractual mechanism whereby policymakers gain a better overview of AI innovation platforms regarding how they govern information tools (data availability) and software tools (accessibility of AI modules). Contractual mechanisms can enhance public sector oversight on platforms’ governance of their boundary resources, which in the case of China, provides a clearer indication of how progress in AI is made. 
Government mechanisms that affect a platform’s boundary resources are also linked to control over interoperability between domestic and international ecosystems and associated data and information flows. In China, the internet environment is more tightly controlled than elsewhere due to the Great Firewall (GFW). One interviewee notes that “Google and Facebook are not in China so we can hardly access their platform” [2DTF2]. This may create idiosyncratic obstacles to AI innovation as Google and Facebook also are behind some of the most widely used deep learning frameworks, such as TensorFlow and PyTorch. While both frameworks are available as open-source software, restrictions on interoperability could be a hindrance in terms of accessing accompanying materials. An engineer, for example, notes that “if you need to download the bigger data from some university server in the U.S., or Europe, and then it goes through the Great Firewall […] it's going to take weeks to download that” [1NOIP2]. While open source code-repositories such as GitHub or Stack Overflow are accessible inside China, “the problem is usually with these platforms […] that sometimes you have trouble accessing it due to the Great Firewall. [And so what happens] is a sort of clones or maybe delayed copies onto cloned websites [that are] easier to access from inside China. Sometimes with translations and so on” [1NOIP2]. 
If code-repositories such as GitHub were not available in China, an interviewee speculates that “there's a lot of people who would be [in trouble, and] you would probably try to find another way around the Great Firewall” [1NOIP2]. The Great Firewall of China is considered an interoperability or censorship mechanism that may present some obstacles to AI innovation when connectivity with international ecosystems is limited. This obstacle is partially solved, however, as “most large companies have a special legal VPN [virtual private network] so that they can access Google and things like that” [1NOIP2]. Access to a special legal VPN is viewed as a software mechanism that grants special treatment to some companies. Where The Great Firewall of China creates informational constraints, the provision of a special legal VPN ensures greater interoperability with international ecosystems. However, little is known about how domestic SMEs without access to a special legal VPN may be limited in AI innovation. 
On the one hand, China’s domestic ecosystem is closely interconnected with and dependent on international knowledge flows linked to crucial resources such as data and OSS. At the same time, however, policymakers seek to strengthen China’s domestic position by stressing the need for companies to develop and release proprietary OSS such as deep learning frameworks, with the intention to weaken international couplings and dependencies. These developments were further emphasized in 2020 when Chinese policymakers signaled a shift away from relying on international open-source code repositories, such as GitHub, when the Ministry of Industry and Information technology (MIIT), Huawei, Tencent, and several universities endorsed the Chinese OSS platform ‘Gitee’ as the domestic hub for China’s open-source community. Due to the official endorsement of Gitee (a communicative mechanism) by the MIIT, the construction of an indigenous open-source code repository can be viewed as an infrastructural mechanism that targets a domestic weakness in terms of open source code accessibility. “On the one hand, the Chinese regulatory system gives an advantage to building up companies [through protection from overseas competition via censorship mechanisms], but sometimes the regulatory system can also be a hindrance [due to associated obstacles to interoperability]. China is now working very hard on striking a better balance” [4ITF3].
4.3.	Hybrid platform arrangements
Provincial Science and Technology authorities have been mandated to assist in the promotion of NOIPAI, contingent on regional characteristics of development (MOST, 2019). Practically, this means that collaboration with local governments often takes place through the establishment of hybrid platforms. 
Alibaba is, for example, responsible for building a National Open Innovation Platform for Smart City, which is based on the Alibaba Cloud ET City Brain. ET City Brain forms the infrastructure behind a public intelligence system that can perform real-time analysis of core city functions such as transportation, energy, water, surveillance, and urban management systems.
For example, Alibaba’s ET City Brain collaborates with Shanghai’s Municipal Government to perform digital processing and analysis of the city’s urban infrastructure, including in areas such as transportation, energy, water supply, and construction. During this process, new decision-making systems for public security, public transportation, and public service authorities are developed (Alibaba, 2021). 
The creation of hybrid platforms that incorporate public and private forms of information and infrastructure is viewed as an organizational mechanism built on a negotiated form of authority and control.
As the public sector in China sits on large piles of government data, public sector agencies often seek to reorganize the boundary resources of government data repositories on the supply side (data mechanism) to enable public sector innovation and transformation. An interviewee, however, notes that “the government is reluctant opening very large repositories of data. In the UK, for example, it is different, everybody can download large public databases. In China, there is no public data of that sort. Although the state has all that knowledge, it is registered, but you cannot download knowledge that the government has” [4ITF3]. Another interviewee notes that government data often remains siloed across legacy institutions with limited forms of shared access [2DTF3]. This restricts the availability of government data and may be considered an obstacle to innovation.
However, the NOIPAI initiative is indicative of an alternative way to open public data repositories on the supply side, which may be contrasted with open government data initiatives elsewhere. In the city of Hangzhou, Alibaba’s ET City Brain, for example, uses image recognition technology to analyze the information of 3,000 surveillance cameras while operating 128 signal lights at intersections (Alibaba, 2021). Such initiatives and their underlying mechanisms for data sharing and governance indicate a renegotiation of public and private forms of physical and digital infrastructure and control over these.
In another example, Tencent, responsible for building a National Open Innovation Platform for Medical Imaging, has partnered with Shenzhen’s Municipal Health Planning Commission to build a Big Data Platform that integrates an intelligent healthcare service system. The cooperation relies on Tencent's Miying platform to research AI innovation projects in medical imaging, diagnosis, teaching, standards, and medical quality control. “China still has to catch up on AI in medical because China has the numbers, and it has a very strong need because of the numbers. Also, the size and the underdeveloped rural areas, so you could use lots of things in telemedicine and bringing better diagnosis” [4ITF3]. Tencent’s partnership with Shenzhen Hospital Center includes delivering a public service where residents can engage in AI-based diabetic retinopathy screening through remote diagnosis, for example (Tencent, 2018). 
“The problem is still in deep learning and machine learning. [Chinese companies] can do it fast, but the infrastructure they have not yet copied. […] The big knowledge bases like UMLS [Unified Medical Language System] are not completely adapted to China yet, so there's infrastructural work to do, and people have to agree. There needs to be an agreement between the government and the medical system and research” [4ITF3]. In the case of Tencent’s NOIPAI for Medical Imaging, the tuning of boundary resources is represented by a multitude of partners that have to agree on new ontologies linked to the creation of knowledge graphs for the medical industry, for example. “This is not there yet, China does not have these ontologies and knowledge graphs. There China is not so [developed], maybe because people are not so willing to share stuff” [4ITF3].
Both the examples of Alibaba and Tencent include the delivery of novel forms of public service or value creation based on hybrid platform solutions and information infrastructure. While provincial Science and Technology authorities have been mandated to assist in the promotion of NOIPAI, policy support tends to be based on procurement-based mechanisms that include access to partnerships with local institutions and associated government data. By collaborating with companies responsible for building National Open Innovation Platforms for AI, public sector agencies and institutions are encouraged to share access to data (increase availability) and resources (increase accessibility) with private sector firms, which strengthens the supply side of platform innovation. The idea is to create reiterative feedback loops that contribute to building indigenous knowledge creation, which can be linked to establishing new ontologies and knowledge graphs as well standards on novel areas of public-private collaboration. “All these [knowledge] bases they enable so much more. […] If you get one layer and then you immediately get a hundred companies that build on that, and then you get the next layers of knowledge on top” [4ITF3]. In the case of Tencent’s Miying NOIPAI, the reiterative loop can be visualized as follows:
 
Fig. 2. Schematic representation of the NOIPAI platform loop in the case of Tencent Miying.
The organizational mechanism of constructing hybrid platforms may result in added synergies when data and systems are open-sourced on National Open Innovation Platforms post-implementation. Application may create critical feedback loops for NOIPAI’s, enabling them to release novel data and tools as open-source materials on their platforms. 
However, hybrid platforms and partnerships are not exclusive to the companies responsible for constructing NOIPAI. The ride-hailing company DiDi Chuxing, for instance, develops a range of smart city solutions connected with enhancing traffic flows and urban mobility. “We cooperate with local governments, we offer them big data analytics, just like cloud and smart transportation, there is not only DiDi’s data on the cloud but also the public transportation systems data” [2DTF1].
In embracing a platform-induced way of thinking and organization, policymakers seek to enable new kinds of information infrastructure, for example, to power smart cities, traffic flows, electricity grids, court systems, surveillance systems, healthcare, finance, and supply chains. To varying degrees, these areas of application will be connected to the data and AI modules that subsequently can be released on China’s National Open Innovation Platforms for AI (see Table 1). “All of this can be seen as infrastructure building. And so it's a long process” [4ITF3].
Table 4. Government mechanisms for platform boundary resource tuning.
Type of Mechanism	Boundary Resource Characteristic	How it affects platform governance
Cooperation	Encourage cooperative behavior: at the periphery, e.g., by bridging algorithmic research in universities with research and solutions from the private sector	Indirectly: through bringing diverse actors together at the periphery
Communication	National Platform emblem: a communicative mechanism that is used to endorse and elevate selected private sector platforms to the status of national platforms for AI	Indirectly: signals AI open-source developments as a fruitful direction for the industry to move in
Contractual 	Reporting: information exchange between government and platform core whereby policymakers gain a better overview of AI innovation platforms in terms of how they govern data availability, as well as the accessibility of AI modules on their platform	Directly: platforms are obliged to provide annual progress reports on how data and tools are released and shared and how the platform core is being opened to outside participation as well as how it affects AI innovation
Interoperability 	The Great Firewall of China: a censorship mechanism that places limitations on the degree of information and data interoperability with international ecosystems	Directly: by reducing data availability and software accessibility between domestic and international platforms and ecosystems
Software	Special legal VPN: a software mechanism that grants privileged treatment to some companies, which enhances their access to international ecosystems and associated knowledge flows	Directly: by improving data availability and software accessibility between domestic and international platforms and ecosystems
Infrastructural	Indigenous open-source code-repository (Gitee): makes it easier for SMEs to access open-source data and knowledge, e.g., associated with OSS	Directly/Indirectly: Gitee complements innovation platforms and their members at the periphery by distributing open-source materials
Hybrid platform solutions – adjacent to the NOIPAI initiative
Organizational	Public information infrastructure and value creation: developed by platform core, public partners, and peripheral members 	Directly: control is negotiated between public partners and private platforms, establishing mixed ownership and control forms. The core platform usually holds leverage in devising the architecture of the solution, e.g., in terms of adjacent standards
Data	Selective and gradual opening of government data: in partnership with platforms, sometimes as hybrid public-private platform solutions that provide new measures of public information infrastructure	Directly/Indirectly: OGD may affect firms' capabilities to innovate in AI directly through increased accessibility to novel datasets or indirectly through complementing proprietary information and data 
Procurement 	Subsidizes certain kinds of AI development: including access to government projects as well as partnerships with local government institutions 	Directly: by procuring specific platform solutions and supplying public sector data, which is released on a selective basis

5.	Discussion 
Several government mechanisms have been located, which have direct and indirect implications for the governance of platforms. The mechanisms are primarily discussed in relation to AI innovation platforms and have implications for transaction platforms. This section discusses how each of these mechanisms affects platform boundary resources. Examples of government mechanisms from other countries are included to provide nuance on China’s strategy of creating National Open Innovation Platforms for AI. A revised model of platform boundary resources that elaborate on government mechanisms as contextual factors is presented at the end of this section before implications for research and practice and limitations and directions for future research are offered.  
5.1	Data mechanisms 
Progress in AI generally requires access to data. Policy mechanisms aim to address questions such as which entities (public and private) share their data, for what purposes, and under which conditions shared data is likely to impact AI systems' development. Large technology companies and their innovation platforms are both providers and gatekeepers of strategic digital resources such as infrastructure, compute, data, and associated access to large user bases and their data (Geradin, 2021). The business model of most platforms has similarly been argued to be based on control over- and valorization of data (Rahman & Thelen, 2019). 
The centralizing nature of the production function in large digital platforms means that the data and AI models that are developed and deployed by these may create unique barriers to entry by startups (Bommasani et al.,  2021). This is witnessed in the prohibitive costs of resources (data and compute) needed to develop innovative AI models such as foundation models or search engines (Bommasani et al., 2021; Radinsky, 2015). Infrastructure investments can therefore be a barrier to AI development and adoption for researchers and resource-constrained startups (Mikalef & Gupta, 2021). 
Mikhaylov, Esteve, and Campion (2018) have argued that successful development of artificial intelligence capabilities relies on developing greater data-sharing relationships across government, industry, and academia. The NOIPAI initiative demonstrates a policy that aims to affect information tools (data) and software tools (e.g., deep learning frameworks) on both the supply and demand sides. On the demand side, National Open Innovation Platforms for AI are obliged, via contractual mechanisms, to contribute greater although unknown quantities of proprietary data, which makes information tools more available. On the supply side, government data may be resourced to platforms on a selective basis, e.g., based on procurement, or may be distributed freely through open government data platforms, e.g., based on licensing agreements (Cingolani, 2021).
As governments build open data ecosystems through the provision of open government data on the supply side, they also embark on a transformation of existing practices and services on the demand side by increasing data availability to actors at the periphery. Novel partnerships that result in the formation of hybrid platforms established by public agencies on the supply side and application and content developers on the demand side are also essential steps in supporting the development of open-data ecosystems (Wang & Shepherd, 2020). 
Data trusts are another mechanism that aims to increase data sharing among companies, the government, and individual developers. A data trust is a legal framework for managing shared data, which may promote collaboration among its members through establishing common securing rules for data security, privacy, and confidentiality on both the supply and demand sides. 
The use of data trusts is, for example, a part of the United Kingdom’s AI Sector Deal, which establishes policies to promote the adoption and use of AI  (GOV.UK, 2019). Government mechanisms can therefore include the facilitation of data stewardship and bottom-up empowerment, e.g., through legislative mechanisms such as establishing data rights and protections, data sharing policies, and legal and infrastructural obligations on the supply side (Aapti Institute, Open Data Institute, 2021). 
5.2.	Interoperability mechanisms  
In platform-based digital ecosystems, interoperability refers to the ability to transfer and render data, information, and software across systems, applications, or components (Gasser, 2015), both domestically within borders and internationally across borders. Governments have several mechanisms at their disposal to affect platform and ecosystem interoperability. 
The case of NOIPAI has outlined that China’s Great Firewall, a censorship mechanism, also limits domestic and international forms of data and information interoperability (Băzăvan, 2019), which affects platforms boundary resources by limiting access resourcing tools from international ecosystems on the supply side. In other words, interoperability mechanisms can be used to establish national boundaries to global digital ecosystems (Tsujimoto et al., 2018). This creates barriers to external competition, which may be used to favor the development of domestic technology companies (Arenal et al., 2020). Domestic companies, however, could also be adversely affected by restricted international integration due to limited access to information and resources. In the case of China, interoperability issues have been addressed through the provisioning of a special legal VPN, a software tool that can be used to circumvent constraints to accessing resourcing tools and increase data and software availability and accessibility on the demand side. 
Interoperability measures are also guided by legal mechanisms that govern and regulate cross-border data flows and thereby restrict information tools. In Europe, for example, the adequacy approach is a legal mechanism of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) that provides conditions under which third-party countries are held to offer sufficient protection for the transfer and use of personal data (Chen, 2019). 
Interoperability mechanisms also relate to antitrust mechanisms that guide competition in the digital economy. In terms of innovation platforms, software-based resourcing tools accessed via APIs or SDKs can be constructed to limit interoperability between competing platforms, products, and services (Nooren et al., 2018). Antitrust mechanisms include legal measures that work to avoid that platforms construct software tools in ways that promote consumer lock-in and make it costly for users on the demand side to switch their services to competing platforms (Martens, 2016). In 2004, the European Commission, for example, ordered Microsoft to provide essential interoperability information that permitted the development of competing products (Simcoe, 2012). 
In relation to AI development and innovation practices, government mechanisms that address interoperability concerns relate to ensuring fair and equal competition. Forcing incumbents to share their data (resourcing tools) and intellectual property (securing rules) with new entrants has been debated as an alternative to breaking up firms out of anticompetitive concerns related to disproportionate data centralization (Chen, 2019). In terms of transaction platforms, their use of data on third-party sellers has, for example, been argued to give them an unfair advantage over competitors (Lomas, 2020). However, the proper organizational solutions, as well as technical (resourcing) and legal (securing) standards, have not yet been developed to ensure that concerns over fairness and security are sufficiently met in terms of structuring new boundary resources and forms of data-sharing and interoperability among digital platforms (Chen, 2019).
5.3.	Contractual mechanisms  
Governments may directly affect the process of boundary resource tuning through the use of contractual mechanisms (e.g., reporting rules). As seen from the case of NOIPAI, such rules may be used to provide the government with increased oversight on platform-based activities, including the tools it uses to resource peripheral members and the rules it uses to govern participation in the wider ecosystem. Policymakers can use such knowledge to assess how a platform lives up to pre-specified contractual obligations (Klievink et al., 2016) or whether a platform complies with existing laws and regulations. New informational channels between public agencies and private platforms may also be established through audit-based mechanisms that seek to increase public oversight, e.g., on strategic areas of digital development and competition (Gorwa et al., 2020). Audit-based tools are also relevant for launching new forms of oversight with algorithmic use and can ensure that principles such as fairness, transparency, and accuracy are sufficiently met and accounted for in the digital economy (Brown et al., 2017; Raji et al., 2020).
5.4.	Procurement mechanisms  
Procurement-based mechanisms can support AI innovation and exemplify a platform or ecosystem pull strategy on the demand side. Beraja, Yang, and Yuchtman (2021) have argued that the government may shape the direction of innovation and growth in data-intensive economies because the government is a key collector of data, and as data is sharable across uses within firms. This may generate economies of scope when governments include supply-side data as a part of a procurement-based contract. In terms of facial recognition AI in China, government procurement contracts have been documented to be conducive to creating economies of scope arising from government data. This means that procurement-based mechanisms can lead to the development of improved commercial software in private innovation platforms (Beraja et al., 2021). Government procurement of digital technologies and services can consequently play an entrepreneurial role in promoting competition and innovation among suppliers. This has implications for the development of innovation platforms resourcing tools and contributes to shaping generativity through testing new technologies, such as facial recognition systems, for public sector use (Hanna, 2018). Advanced economies have also been documented to use government procurement to promote open standards, interoperability, and best practices in digital technology adoption (Hanna, 2018).  
5.5.	Cooperation and communication mechanisms 
Several government mechanisms do not affect platforms boundary resources directly but have indirect consequences for platform governance and ecosystem participation. These include mechanisms such as cooperation and communication. 
In terms of cooperation, the case of China’s NOIPAI has shown that cooperative behavior may be encouraged at a platform's periphery, for example, through bridging algorithmic research in universities with research and solutions from the private sector.
In terms of communication, the case of China’s NOIPAI shows that governments may use communicative mechanisms to signal fruitful directions for the industry to move in. Pustovrh and Drnov (2020) have documented how these mechanisms may include public policy endorsing key actors’ open innovation activities. Communicative mechanisms may also signal that broad and active participation can lead to shared influence and control, which facilitates productive group dynamics (Ansell & Gash, 2007). 
Communicative and cooperation-based alignment of goals and objectives among participants may be essential when organizations from different sectors collaborate (Ansell & Gash, 2018). Therefore, communication and cooperation-based mechanisms have important effects on social tools, especially in terms of incentivizing and guiding certain forms of platform behavior. 
 
Fig. 3. Government mechanisms for platform boundary resource tuning. 
5.6.	Organizational mechanisms
Organizational mechanisms, such as constructing hybrid platform solutions, have implications for platform governance and boundary resource tuning. In particular, since hybrid platforms often are constructed to create new kinds of information infrastructure in areas such as healthcare, transportation, public utilities, and so on (Kallinikos & Tempini, 2014), they may also be conducive to formulating new technology standards on emergent areas of infrastructure (Chen & Lee, 2018). Hybrid platforms consequently enable new forms of public value creation (Kim et al., 2021; Kretschmer et al., 2020; Panagiotopoulos et al., 2019) and novel governance arrangements to emerge (Chen et al., 2021). Collaborative platforms have similarly been argued to be conducive to developing shared assets, designs, and standards that may create multiplier effects among participants (Mikhaylov et al., 2018). 
Hybrid platforms represent a distinct type of boundary resource tuning and platform orchestration that shifts platform authority in the direction of negotiated or mixed public-private control points, which jointly affect the functionality and generativity of the platform (Klievink et al., 2016). This means that resourcing tools and securing rules become subject to negotiation that determines the openness and accessibility of the hybrid platform arrangement, which contributes to a redefinition of public and private spheres of influence in the process (Jacobides et al., 2019). 
Hybrid platform initiatives also include establishing entirely new forms of organization with unique boundary resources that can be explicitly aimed at enhancing AI innovation. For example, in the United States, the National Research Cloud initiative aims to provide academic and non-profit researchers with enhanced access to compute and government datasets for education and research (Ho et al., 2021). In Europe, the European Open Science Cloud (EOSC) similarly aims at providing “researchers, innovators, companies, and citizens with a federated and open multi-disciplinary environment where they can publish, find and re-use data, tools, and services for research, innovation and educational purposes” (European Commission, 2020, p.1). 
China has also established a national research cloud, the China Science and Technology Cloud, while the policy of creating National Open Innovation Platforms for AI should be viewed as a complementary strategy that seeks to affect the boundary resources and generativity of leading private sector innovation platforms in ways that do not result in the construction of a hybrid platform arrangement. Instead, the NOIPAI policy initiative seeks to affect the AI production function by increasing the availability of private sector resourcing tools, which pulls the initiative toward negotiated forms of platform authority and control without establishing hybrid platforms. Instead, National Open Innovation Platforms for AI continue to be based on application-driven, enterprise-led, and market-oriented principles (Wu et al., 2020). The formation of hybrid public infrastructure platforms is, as argued, only indirectly associated with the NOIPAI initiative but does have important implications for NOIPAI in terms of creating feedback loops that may affect resourcing tools (see: Fig. 2). China’s National Open Innovation Platforms for AI provides a case for rethinking how policymakers seek to orchestrate open data availability and AI-related OSS accessibility without maintaining control over the value creation process itself (Janssen & Helbig, 2016).
 
Fig. 4. The centralization of platform authority in different organizational structures.   
Different government mechanisms and processes for government-induced boundary resource tuning are directly associated with the organizational structure, which is argued to move across government, hybrid, and private platform constellations. As detailed throughout the paper, government mechanisms can affect resourcing tools and securing rules in a range of ways that have important direct and indirect implications for platform governance and the process of boundary resource tuning.
5.7.	Implications for research  
Based on the findings and discussion, several implications for research emerge. First, existing theory of boundary resources has been extended (Bonina and Eaton, 2020; Eaton et al., 2015; Ghazawneh and Henfridsson, 2010, 2013) through clarification of external factors as concrete government mechanisms that can be used to influence innovation platforms boundary resources. Government mechanisms have important implications for how resourcing tools and securing rules are structured and governed, which has consequences for data availability, software accessibility, and digital forms of interoperability. The suggested government mechanisms reorient existing theories on platform governance (Constantinides et al., 2018; Ghazawneh and Henfridsson, 2010, 2013) towards the role of the government in shaping and affecting platform boundary resources. For governments, the toolkit on how to influence platform boundary resources remains nascent, which means that the findings have important implications for how governments continue to engage in a platform induced way of thinking and organization (Brown et al., 2017; Cordella & Paletti, 2019; Ju et al., 2019; Klievink et al., 2017; Zhao & Fan, 2018). The findings of the paper contribute to establishing a research agenda around the new and emergent ways in which governments seek to structure and orchestrate the platform economy while ensuring fair competition and supporting (AI) generativity.
Second, this paper has focused empirically on the case of boundary resource tuning in China, which has provided insights into government mechanisms in a state-capitalist setting. However, some of the uncovered mechanisms are unique to the case of China. The Great Firewall, for example, censors information and regulates the internet in ways that contrast with governance mechanisms elsewhere. China’s recent ban on for-profit educational-technology platforms (Chan et al., 2021), and the ability to take controlling board seats in private-sector technology companies (Yang & Goh, 2021), are also examples of policymakers' distinct mechanisms to affect the platform economy in China. It is crucial to understand how government mechanisms for platform boundary resource tuning differ between countries and what this means for platform governance. This paper has contributed to opening this agenda by reorienting the platform literature towards how resourcing tools and securing rules are shaped by the interplay of government mechanisms and private-sector platform governance (Cordella & Paletti, 2019; Gorwa, 2019; Raunio et al., 2018). 
Third, the study contributes to the literature on platform architecture and digital infrastructure by elaborating on the growing role of hybrid platforms (Constantinides et al., 2018; Klievink et al., 2016; Tilson et al., 2010). Many elements of China’s National Open Innovation Platforms for AI exhibit hybrid infrastructural elements that have been little studied (Klievink et al., 2016) but have several implications for research. This paper has taken a step in recognizing that government, hybrid and private platforms must be treated as distinct forms of organization, which have important implications for platform authority and the processes of boundary resource tuning. Authority and control over tuning mechanisms are likely to differ considerably across the three forms of organization, which makes it an area of research that needs be further studied and understood. 
At last, implications are found in relation to AI innovation and the role of governments in affecting access to resourcing tools such as data availability, software and compute accessibility, and platform openness and interoperability. How governments seek to affect the generativity associated with each area has important implications for AI innovation going forward. Therefore, the findings of the paper contribute to the growing literature on the role of the government as a strategic enabler (Battisti et al., 2022) and a regulator of AI and the digital economy (Lee et al., 2019). 
5.8.	Implications for practice 
For policymakers, implications revolve around how varying mechanisms may affect the boundary resources of platforms and what it means for platform innovation in areas such as AI development. Policymakers need to know how new and existing mechanisms may be used to support and regulate platforms’ process of boundary resource tuning. These mechanisms have direct and indirect effects on platform resourcing tools and securing rules and can guide specific behavior in the digital economy, for example, in relation to AI generativity. Mechanisms may include information and data mechanisms (e.g., OGD, data trusts, shared data repositories), interoperability mechanisms (e.g., censorship, software, competition, data), as well as legal and contractual mechanisms (e.g., GDPR, reporting, auditing), among others. These mechanisms have implications for the availability of data, the accessibility of software, and domestic and international forms of interoperability. Policymakers equally have an extended range of organizational mechanisms (e.g., hybrid platforms and information infrastructure, procurement) at their disposal, which can be used to affect or create new areas of public value creation. Fruitful strategies already engage with fostering open and inclusive forms of data sharing and open-source software distribution. Policymakers should strive toward deploying mechanisms that target interoperability, participation, or anti-competitive behavior without deploying overly discriminatory measures to enhance digital sovereignty at the cost of international forms of digital integration and cooperation.
For managers of international innovation platforms, implications involve how platform openness and ecosystem integration are strategized differently across fragmented international borders and digital ecosystems. Managerial considerations include how policy mechanisms can be a confounding factor in limiting or enabling specific resourcing tools or securing rules. Given the rise of interest in reinforcing varying forms of digital sovereignty, managers should pay special attention to local or regional, i.e., geographical platform requirements, e.g., data use, access, openness, interoperability, portability, control. The kind of services offered on international innovation platforms and how these stay compliant with legal requirements in different countries and constituencies is a rising case in point. 
6.	Limitations and future research 
This study has several limitations. The first limitation concerns the geographic location of the study. While China has emerged as a world leader in terms of AI innovation in a relatively short time span (Zhang et al., 2021), the role of industrial policies and political intervention in the economy, e.g., in terms of strategy, financing, and AI ethics (Roberts et al., 2021), makes China distinct from other countries. By implication, not all conclusions drawn from the analysis may be applicable to other geographical contexts. This means that government mechanisms could look different elsewhere. While the paper has articulated examples of government mechanisms from other countries to nuance the findings, an exhaustive list of government mechanisms for boundary resource tuning has not been established. Instead, this paper has provided the foundation for establishing a more extensive research agenda on the governance of platform boundary resources at the intersection of public and private interests. More research and documentation are therefore needed in terms of how varying government mechanisms can be used to affect the process of boundary resource tuning. Future studies are encouraged to look into government mechanisms for boundary resource tuning in other geographical contexts or could try to assess what differing government mechanisms mean for international platforms' operation and organization and forms of (AI) innovation. The interrelations between international platforms' operation, and national forms of constraint, is an important area to be studied further. How varying national regimes affect the boundary resources of international platforms differently will have important implications for digital sovereignty and digital competition going forward.
The second limitation concerns data analysis. The classification of different categories of government mechanisms in the study could be partially influenced by subjective bias in interpreting the empirical data. However, the adopted protocol for coding interview and document data (Strauss & Corbin, 1998) should minimize any potential risks of bias in interpretation. To further mitigate these concerns, future studies could engage in a replication of the uncovered government mechanisms, perhaps based on a different case study, or could seek to determine their applicability to other geographical contexts and cases. This approach would contribute to the emergence of a more stringent and generalizable set of government mechanisms, which may be more widely applied across geographical contexts. This would strengthen knowledge of the international applicability of government mechanisms for boundary resource tuning while limiting potential biases in the individual studies. Therefore, the proposed government mechanism categories could be further tested, elaborated, and extended in future studies.
Third, direct contact with policymakers responsible for formulating and implementing the NOIPAI initiative was not established in this study, perhaps due to the increased sensitivity of China's industrial policies or political tensions in international high-tech competition. This represents a limitation in terms of public sector verifiability of the results. Future studies could mitigate this limitation by interviewing more people, including policymakers. This would be informative in understanding how the NOIPAI initiative continues to evolve and expand and how the individual platforms contribute to a larger policy agenda, e.g., in terms of AI-related digital infrastructure building at a national level. 
At last, more research needs to be aimed at the role and structure of hybrid platforms, including how these are used as organizational mechanisms for novel public-private forms of interaction and governance. The findings of this paper encourage a more comprehensive research agenda to be built around the formation of hybrid platforms as a distinct form of organization and governance. In terms of AI innovation, the ongoing centralization of resourcing tools such as data and compute in large platforms could be partially alleviated by establishing hybrid platforms and research clouds that provide better and more equal access to resources. The organization of boundary resources associated with hybrid platforms and how these inform AI innovation exemplifies a nascent agenda with promising avenues for future research.
