
1 Introduction
The purpose of this paper is to examine the emerging technological innovation system for higher education EdTech in Europe. Mapping the space for innovation and economic development in the EdTech market, in a European and higher education context, can support further research in the area. By mapping the innovation hubs for European EdTech, the interactions and networks of EdTech interest organizations within the European Union can provide insights to the development of a connected ecosystem within the regulatory and geographical bounds of the EU. Further, the paper investigates the EU regulations, policies, and initiatives to support the development of European EdTech interests and provide general insights to the current EdTech landscape within the EU.
1.1 Context
In the past decade, investments into educational technologies have increased manyfold, spurred by digital transformation of society, and more recently, with a global pandemic pushing much education into the digital space, in many places, basically overnight. While much indicates that education will remain in the physical space in the future, the use of digital and online solutions have become increasingly integral to the educational experience across primary, secondary, and tertiary education alike.
It is currently estimated that almost fifty percent of education time is spent online. Meanwhile, only four percent of global education spend is digital – considered to be one of the largest market opportunities yet to be digitized – a gap estimated to be worth close to three trillion dollars (Brighteye Ventures, 2021). The digital and online solutions to provide education or educational support are colloquially known as EdTech, primarily emerging in the new millennia, as the internet and computers became common commodities among people and institutions. Today, the space is permeated by both startups and incumbent firms, with increasing interest from policy-makers, venture funds, and local interest organizations. European EdTech investments are among the fastest growing categories for investment in the world, receiving around 2.5 billion dollars in funding in 2021, more than tripling the amount invested in 2020. The growth is believed to be driven by three main factors: significant growth during the pandemic fuelling higher valuations; increasing involvement from US- and Europe-based generalist and private funds and; the expectation that remote working and learning will continue post-pandemic to a greater extent than first expected (Brighteye Ventures, 2022). In the current EdTech ecosystem, thirty-three companies are considered unicorns (privately held startups, valued at more than a billion dollars), with more than two thirds emerging since 2020. While European EdTech startups are now experiencing a significant influx of investments, Europe has been laggard compared to other regions in the space, and of the thirty-three companies considered unicorns, only three have emerged from European countries. While the global market for EdTech is still considered emerging, with the first EdTech unicorn minted in 2014, recent reports indicate a maturing, especially in the European context, with a stabilization of investments transactions and increasing valuations (Brighteye Ventures, 2022).
Generally, EdTech companies approach five different demographics: pre-K, K-12, higher learning, corporate learning, and lifelong & consumer learning. Within Europe, companies aiming at pre-K and higher education fall behind in startup investments, with only around 11 percent of the total investment value from 2021 going toward higher education EdTech companies. Companies engaging with corporate and lifelong & consumer learning are succeeding both regionally and globally, meanwhile investments into areas where educational institutions are dominating the space, are much more reliant on local policies and existing environments. In North America, for instance, the privatization of higher education has allowed for more opportunities for
EdTech in schools and universities, famously with the introduction of Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) (Daniel, 2012). Conversely, China, historically the market leader for investments into EdTech, saw a massive decrease in investments in EdTech companies in 2021 after new policies limiting the environment for EdTech in education were instated (Chen, 2021; Brighteye Ventures, 2022). In the European context, higher education institutions have been perceived as complicated clients, with long sales-cycles and limited digital penetration (Brighteye Ventures, 2019; Andersen and Jurowetzki, 2022; Liu et al., 2020). Despite the complicated nature of interaction between educational institutions and EdTech companies, the market is in healthy development with promising future outlooks. While the overall amount invested into European EdTechs are still less than the leading markets of North America, China, and India, the investment behavior for higher education EdTechs are similar between North America and Europe, indicating a consistent interest in the demographic, despite the complex environment.
Europe consists of many countries, spread across different political and geographical climates, with varying degrees of digital infrastructure and interest in developing EdTech ecosystems. While not part of the EU, UK have historically been a leading figure as a central hub for investment and innovation of EdTech in Europe, and forty percent of European EdTech investments were funded from UK in 2021. six regions have dominated the space for EdTech investments, providing the locality for most prominent EdTech startups established and funded within Europe: UK, France, Germany, Ireland, the Nordics, and Spain. Western and Northern Europe is dominating the space, but there are cases of EdTech startups in most European countries. Increasingly, actors within European countries engage in developing a market and ecosystem for the advancement of local and regional EdTech interest, and industry associations are sprouting increasingly within EU countries in the last decade. From a regulatory and political perspective, the EU, and the European Commission (EC), have aided in the establishment of a collaborative network of EdTech associations across the European landscape, named the European EdTech Alliance (EEA). The EEA facilitates a common ground for the development of an EdTech market within Europe, and further facilitates collaborative interactions between industry, policy, educators, students, and institutions to provide optimal solutions to contemporary educational challenges.
In this paper, the EEA network is explored to understand the development of support structures for higher education EdTech within the EU, to map the landscape for advocacy coalitions spread across the EU, to identify key actors in the market development, and to identify the formation of regional strategic alliances and important interactions between industry and institutions. The emerging higher education EdTech ecosystem in Europe is explored through a framework of technological innovation systems (TIS), utilizing social network analysis (SNA) to demarcate the developments of support structures for EdTech and provide insights to potential catalysts and barriers for further developments in the market.
RQ: What are the characteristics of the support structures for EdTech in the
European Union?
1.2 Review
Educational Technology, or EdTech, is considered a relatively emergent field of scientific study, the contemporary conceptualization closely related to larger social changes such as the digital transformation of society and the coalescent developments of Information and Communication Technology (ICT). The field of EdTech is generally located within the social sciences, with differing approaches interacting internally in complex ways. Emerging along the turn of the new millennia, research in EdTech have originated from different avenues and with different monikers, but have increasingly converged recently as educational technology, or EdTech. In the past twenty years, EdTech has been researched most prominently under the guise of technology-enhanced learning (TEL), learning technology, computer-supported collaborative learning, learning science, and networked learning, often providing different aspects in the social interaction of people and technology (Czerniewicz, 2010). For research in EdTech, there are generally two main focus points: the users, and the technologies. Research typically examines questions of adoption and diffusion (Liu et al., 2020; Bennett et al., 2012; Porter and Graham, 2016; Granić, 2022), teaching and learning environments in a digital age
(Mishra and Koehler, 2006; Asamoah, 2019; Bennett et al., 2017), student engagement (Bond and Bedenlier, 2019; Bond et al., 2020), and technology developments and their potential impact (Tsai et al., 2019; Sutton and DeSantis, 2017; Zawacki-Richter et al.,
2019), with various sub-questions relating to potential of consequences of EdTech, such as the future outlook for education, organizational structures, and the mental well-being of students and teachers (Andersen et al., 2021; Haslam et al., 2020; Kee, 2020). EdTech innovation, and the ecosystem surrounding EdTech, is an area of the field sparsely researched, largely due to the relative novelty of EdTech as an industry. The use of digital solutions within the educational sphere – software and online services specifically aimed at education – have surged considerably during the 2010s, with significantly enhanced diffusion during COVID-19 restrictions and lock-downs. While there is great academic interest in EdTech from the user perspective; institutions, educators, and students, most research from the industry perspective is emerging from interest organizations through reports or white papers (Holon IQ, 2022; Brighteye Ventures, 2019, 2021, 2022). For EdTech in higher education, studies indicate that there is a complex and intricate interaction between institutions, educators, students, and the companies in the development and diffusion of EdTech. The organizational structure and capacity for external companies in the higher education space is cited as a central challenge to EdTech companies wishing to enter the market (Andersen and Jurowetzki, 2022; Liu et al., 2020; Brighteye Ventures, 2019; Sutton and DeSantis, 2017; Englund et al., 2017). For EdTech companies with higher education institutions as their primary customer, it is vital that a foundation for collaboration can be established, and higher education institutions are equally pressed to provide education matching the needs and expectations of contemporary society. Though studies of the higher education EdTech innovation system are limited, some research have explored EdTech startups’ viability in the education ecosystem, for instance through their ability to adapt and align business models to fit the needs of public service providers (Mattsson and Andersson, 2019; Renz et al., 2020; Thomas and Nedeva, 2018). An adjacent avenue of research have emerged even more recently with a stream of studies on Cloud Computing (CC) in higher education, where CC is proposed as an important link in enabling interaction between EdTech companies and higher education institutions (Qasem et al., 2019, 2020; Ali, 2019). CC is, in short, a mode of computing following the assumption that the Internet can be used to store software applications, data, or both. A user of CC can then access these services through the Internet from any place, at any given time. In many modern organizations and institutions, CC is considered the fifth utility after the four essential utilities: water, electricity, gas, and telephone. Most modern higher education institutions today boasts a CC infrastructure, either by in-house development or through external suppliers, prominently Amazon Web Services and Google Cloud. In CC research, it is argued that CC infrastructure provides an essential solution to some major problems higher education institutions face in contemporary society, such as increase in participants, requirements for digital infrastructure and IT, providing affordable education services, and improving education quality (Qasem et al., 2019, 2020). Further, it is argued that CC functions as a central component in allowing higher education institutions to interact with the EdTech market and, more broadly, technological developments led by industry’s fourth revolution (IR 4.0), in turn enabled by CC, Internet of Things (IoT), big data analytics, and mobile devices. In CC research, IR 4.0 holds great promise for the fortuitous development of higher education institution teaching, research, and general service provision (Qasem et al., 2019; Ali, 2019). CC infrastructure and EdTech in higher education institutions are in many ways intrinsically connected and concurrently developing, as higher education adapts to an increasingly competitive market.
Among academic research and reports published by interest organizations and capital funds, there is a general understanding that there are different markets across the global landscape for higher education EdTech, with North America, China, India, and Europe being the most prominent areas for investment (Brighteye Ventures, 2022). Apart from their geographical location, these markets are demarcated by specific needs and expectations from EdTech solutions, different rules and regulations from governments, different accessibility to the customers, and different opportunities for funding and cash-flow. Research into the European startup ecosystem has shown an emerging market that is gaining traction, with increased funding, but with a more complex userbase than other areas of EdTech, due to the structure of universities in contemporary society. While there is limited research into the higher education EdTech ecosystem, there is much research done on innovation systems for startups in emerging fields, and can provide a solid framework for investigating the development of the higher education EdTech market in Europe. Among the studies of innovation systems, it is generally recognized that companies hoping to establish themselves in a digital market, must strive to become part of an integrated support network to enhance their chances of longevity and potential success (Amitrano et al., 2018).
2 Theoretical foundation and analytical framework
Studies of innovation systems (IS) emerged in research in the 1980s following developments in evolutionary and industrial economics (Lundvall, 1985; Freeman, 1987). IS research is based on a central observation that innovation is both an individual and a collective act that involves the interplay of multiple, rationally bounded actors. IS is thus founded on the assumption that determinants of technology diffusion cannot be found solely by investigating individual actors’ strategies, but rather, a thorough examination of an interconnected system of actors and institutions is needed to fully understand the processes of technology diffusion. IS research is usually applied in specific boundaries demarcating the market of interest for research: national innovation systems, sectoral innovation systems, and technology innovation systems (Carlsson and Stankiewicz, 1991; Decourt, 2019). In this paper, the European higher education EdTech market is studied through the Technology Innovation System (TIS) scope. TIS can be defined as “a dynamic network of agents interacting in a specific economic/industrial area under a particular institutional infrastructure and involved in the generation, diffusion, and utilization of technology” (Carlsson and Stankiewicz, 1991). In this conceptualization, a TIS is formed by a set of structural elements: actors, networks, and institutions. Actors are firms, knowledge organizations, regulators, investors, and non-governmental organizations. Networks are formed by formal groups as industry organizations or certification groups, and informal interactions, for instance, buyer-seller relationships and interorganizational collaborations. Institutions refer broadly to “the rules of the game”. Concretely, institutions include regulation, laws, standards, but also values and shared expectations. Institutions play a significant role in the legitimization and veracity of emerging technologies by providing resources such as funding and protective spaces for development, but actors and technologies must align their goals to the institutional structures, to succeed and thrive in the system (Decourt, 2019; Musiolik et al., 2012). The process of investigation of these structural elements have been defined as a set of system functions by Jacobsson and Bergek (2011) as “intermediate variables between structure and system performance”. System functions corresponds with processes that need to take place for an innovation to be diffused, providing an analytical framework that can be applied for a TIS across any boundary. While there have been multiple taxonomies developed for a functional analysis of a TIS, most rely on the classification articulated by Suurs and Hekkert (2009), visualized in table 1 below.
TIS frameworks have become a popular approach to analyzing emerging technology markets, especially within sustainability and renewable energies research, but can be perceived as enabling a relatively simple analysis of any emerging market, providing valuable insights, but not fully encapsulating the complex interplay of incumbent firms and existing industries in the development of novel market spaces. TIS is often focused on rather simple technological relationships and tends to downplay the complexity and variety of technological interactions inside and outside the TIS – that technologies are often embedded in diverse and asymmetric relationships that can change and diverge over time and across spatial dimensions. Despite the criticisms laid on the framework, TIS analyses can bring important insights to the developments of emergent technology markets, that can aid in the illumination of a larger technological ecosystem in development, by identifying potential weaknesses in the system, guiding policy-makers in their decisions, and by informing engaged actors interested in diffusion of the novel technologies.

2.0.1 Methodology of the Functional TIS
The framework for a functional TIS is a tangible approach to mapping and understanding an emergent field of technological development. Through its seven system functions, visualized in table 1, the central components for the potential success of a technological innovation can be laid out. The TIS functions approach is developed as a methodological tool to aggregate various influences on the dynamics of TIS into a set of key processes, allowing for analysis of how these dynamics influence pushes and pulls for the diffusion of a given technology (Bergek et al., 2015). In this paper, the focus is on the network of supportive structures, providing a foundation for startups to thrive in the emergent ecosystem across different member countries within the EU. System function seven will thus be the central focus of analysis, where network analysis will give an overview of key interactions of central players in the European higher education EdTech system. The six other system functions will be elaborated, based on existing reports in the area and desk research as a framing analysis of the field.
In TIS research, delineation of the field in question is essential to the proper conceptualization of the innovation process investigated. In TIS research, innovation is recognized as a complicated process, often highly dependent on the surrounding context structures that provide boundaries, rules, and local expectations to the innovation processes for any given technology. For the validity of TIS research, a clear delineation is pivotal to the veracity of the study and the clarity for the reader (Markard et al., 2015). While there is agreement on the importance of delineation for the investigation of a TIS, it is important to note that each TIS case is unique and should be treated as such – the delineation of a TIS should then be clearly stated and deliberated to give the reader a proper context for the TIS in question. Any change in dimensions or scope will change the case, and thus give different perspectives to the TIS. This effect is not necessarily a bad thing, rather, it is a condition of complex investigation where TIS analyses can function as providing snapshots towards the larger conceptualization of a system in practice. Below, table 2 provides an overview of aspects in the delineation process (Markard et al., 2015).
Name	Definition
Breadth of tech field	Narrow or broad range of technological variants or applications?
Vertical scope	One or several parts of the value chain?
Spatial focus	Local, regional, national, international, or global geographical area?
Field focus	Product or knowledge field?
Temporal focus	Snapshot of current situation or longitudinal study of development?
Table 2: Dimensions of a TIS (Markard et al., 2015)
2.1 Higher education EdTech TIS delineation
The startup ecosystem for higher education EdTech is predominantly Software as a Service (SaaS) and similar business models in the digital space. As such, there is a relatively broad field of technologies, but pretty much all residing in the digital sphere as digital solutions to teaching and learning challenges. EdTech, even in its relatively young state, already provide a myriad of solutions to aid in overcoming contemporary educational challenges. EdTech’s position in the higher education value chain is argued to be primarily positioned in the educational sphere, while many digital solutions exist to solve challenges across the activities (Holon IQ, 2022; Dorri et al., 2012; Rathee and Rajain, 2013). The market for EdTech is defined as a product field, where the companies in the space are aiming to provide services and products to the higher education institutions. Finally, the mapping of the support structures for higher education EdTech in the EU is framed as a snapshot of an emerging market, utilizing the emerging network of NGO’s and accelerators established within and across European countries facilitating, enabling, and pushing for a prosperous European EdTech ecosystem.
3 Methodology and data collection
TIS delineation is defined by analytical choices. While the above steps of delineation are quintessential for any functional TIS analysis, there is no definitively right or wrong approach to analyzing a TIS, as long as it follows the established boundaries and contexts provided by delineation (Markard et al., 2015). Among the more recognized approaches are bibliographic analysis of scientific knowledge fields, and social network analysis (SNA) to outline connections, clusters, and prominent actors within the TIS. In this paper, SNA is applied to understand the network of NGO’s within EU, establishing and facilitating collaboration, legitimization, and communication among EdTech companies, policy-makers, and other stakeholders in the TIS.
3.1 Social Network Analysis
SNA is a methodological approach in social sciences, utilizing connector-indicators between actors in a social structure to identify interactions, clusters, and other network measures. SNA builds on network and graph theory and is usually analyzed in a combination of graphical visualization and various network centrality measures that can provide insights to different aspects of the social structure investigated (Grunspan et al., 2014; Friedkin, 1991). A network is characterized by nodes and edges, and can often be structured across multiple levels and constructs, depending on the goal of analysis. Nodes symbolize actors within the network, as edges symbolizes interactions or relationships between the actors measured. What constitutes nodes and what constitutes edges is thereby dependent on the initial framing of the network and what relationships are deemed interesting to investigate (Friedkin, 1991; Bloch and Jackson, 2021).
3.1.1 SNA measurements
The advocacy coalition for higher education EdTech in the EU will be analyzed through the interactions emerging between key actors across multiple levels within the
EdTech ecosystem.
A central approach in SNA is to utilize centrality measures to highlight central actors and important connections in the network. Centrality measures is a mathematical approach to identify the most prominent actors in a network, based on different ideals of measurement (Bloch and Jackson, 2021; Friedkin, 1991). The most commonly used centrality measures, and also the ones utilized in this paper, are degree centrality, betweenness centrality, closeness centrality, and eigenvector centrality.
Degree centrality measures the number of edges connected to an individual node, thus indicating how “popular” a specific node is in the overall network. Betweenness centrality measures the importance of a node in connecting other nodes in the network. Betweenness captures the role of an agent as an intermediary for information spread between other agents in the network. The measure considers the geodesic distance between two nodes j, k different from the central node i, which still passes through i (Bloch and Jackson, 2021). Closeness centrality indicates the centrality of a node, compared to all other nodes in the network. It extends on degree centrality by investigating neighborhoods of all radii, providing insights to which nodes are most central in the entire network, across various communities and niches. Eigenvector centrality is developed as a measure of the prestige of a given node, by scoring each node based on interconnectedness. The prestige of a node is then indicated by its connection to other high scoring nodes in the network. It is a measure that assumes that nodes who have many links to other nodes who are also highly interlinked, must indicate importance in the overall network. The measure is originally developed as a way of understanding scientific developments in academic journals, but can be useful in measuring the potential interconnectedness of important actors in the system (Bloch and Jackson, 2021). The network of industry associations and other various stakeholders can be elaborated through the use of these measures, and help identify regional clusters within the EU and provide insights to key actors in the emerging ecosystem.
3.2 Data collection
The data utilized for SNA in this study is outlined by the interconnections of European EdTech interest organizations, deliberated by The European EdTech Alliance (EEA). EEA is a consortium founded in 2019, representing national trade associations, interest organizations, accelerators, and clusters working with founders and providers of EdTech to support the domestic and international growth of EdTech and innovation in education (EEA, 2019). The EEA consortium was founded with two main areas of focus: policy and support for EdTech startups and scale-ups. The policy work is centered on the collation of best practices and methodologies to enhance the efficacy and relevance of EdTech in a European context, and the support aspect is focused on providing European EdTech startups with the best possible chances of survival by providing opportunities for networking, understanding best practices, and the insights necessary for EdTech startups to thrive and scale (EEA, 2019).
The consortium is further founded on the assumption that collaboration between European countries and EdTech startups are necessary for the beneficial development of a European EdTech ecosystem. The consortium boasts of connecting more than 2400 EdTech companies across the European landscape, through a network of national and local advocacy coalitions, that further provide insights to the various EdTech companies represented within each European country. It is this collection of interest organizations, or advocacy coalitions, that provide the foundation for SNA in this study, to aid in the visualization and conceptualization of the EdTech ecosystem within the EU. The EEA represents 23 interest organizations, spread across 16 different countries within Europe. While this study is placing boundary limits of the EU, EEA focuses on Europe as a whole, also including UK and Norway among its member countries.
Each of these advocacy coalitions, representing EdTech startups within a country or region, provide an overview of member startups, and further, a network of collaborators, and vested partners in the development of a local EdTech ecosystem. These partners and collaborators form the foundation of the SNA performed in the study, to help identify and map out the key supportive players in the active development of a European EdTech ecosystem. Through this, SNA will aid in mapping the landscape of European EdTech, provide insights to central advocacy actors, and aid in the identification of incumbent firms with a vested interest in the development of EdTech in the EU. Following the TIS delineation provided previously, the SNA will exclude UK and Norway from the analysis. Further, research has been done to identify EdTech companies and interest organizations in the remaining EU countries not represented in the EEA consortium that will be added to the SNA analysis.
The regional and national advocacy coalitions utilized in this study are not solely focused on higher education, but rather, focused on the EdTech ecosystem as a whole. While this can be perceived as problematic for the findings of this study, the coalitions have been controlled for affiliation with higher education institutions, and it is found that all coalitions have initiated collaboration with higher education, usually with local institutions in their surrounding areas, facilitating collaboration and development of EdTech for higher- and lifelong learning. As such, it is deemed that the coalitions can aptly be perceived as intermediaries in the interaction of higher education and EdTech in their respective regions. Apart from publicly available information, the associations have been contacted individually for validation. Additionally, the analysis will be bolstered through desk research, primarily utilizing published white papers and reports from consultancy firms and venture capital (Brighteye Ventures, 2022; Holon IQ, 2022), in turn drawing data from Dealroom, Crunchbase, Pitchbook, and Tracxn, to map out the EdTech ecosystem in Europe and globally. Tracxn also provided insights on the state of EdTech in EU countries not represented in the EEA.
4 Analysis
In this section, the seven functions of the TIS for EdTech in higher education in the EU will be elaborated. Through this, the ecosystem in emergence will be deliberated through existing publications and desk research. Finally, the advocacy coalitions (or the seventh function) will be analyzed through SNA, with a focus on partner organizations, supporting the development of innovation and startup in the EdTech space.
Further, SNA will be utilized to map out the interaction of industry association across the EU landscape to highlight discrepancies among countries under EU regulation.
First, an overview of the identified EdTech industry associations across the EU landscape in figure 1. This map, along with the other visualizations in this analysis,
can be examined interactively on (makestreamlit).
 
Figure 1: Map of EdTech industry associations across the EU
From the initial overview, it becomes clear that there is a strong interest in the development of EdTech in the EU, but especially in the Northern and Western EU, whereas the Southern and Eastern regions are less represented by industry associations. For this initial mapping, EEA is utilized along with a control of EU countries not represented in the map – at the time of data collection, Hungary is the only country with an industry association not part of the EEA, though it has been reported that
Italy is establishing an EdTech industry association as well (EEA, 2019).
4.1 Functional analysis
4.1.1 Function 1 – Entrepreneurial activities
As stated in the introduction of the article, there is a clearly emerging startup ecosystem for EdTech within the EU. While higher education EdTech has been laggard compared to other areas, there is a clear development and increased interest from both Universities, students, startups, and incumbent firms. All industry associations analyzed in the study have established collaboration with higher education institutions, and increasingly, both educators and administration request novel solutions to teaching and learning in the digital space. of the 2400 EdTech companies represented in the EU, It is difficult to get an exact number, focused on higher education as their primary customer, but from funding insights, surveys, and reports, it can be estimated to be around ten percent of companies in the space. The overall development of entrepreneurial activities and investments have increased heavily from 2014-2022.
4.1.2 Function 2 - Knowledge development
Often within TIS studies, knowledge development relates to revolutions within scientific communities surrounding a certain technology or innovation. This is usually studied through patent analysis, and by looking at bibliometric developments within a field. EdTech patents are generally perceived as nonfunctional, because of the fickle nature of the solutions provided by most EdTech companies. Famously, the company Blackboard hold a patent for the deliverance of digital education through learning management systems, but have never been able to enforce the patent (Watters, 2016). For knowledge development in the scientific community surrounding EdTech, technology in education have been studied for a very long time, and across many academic perspectives. In the current EdTech climate in higher education, research implicates the need for better organizational capacity for digital technology, development of digital infrastructure (i.e. cloud infrastructure), and better pathways for testing novel technologies in the higher education space (Holon IQ, 2022; Qasem et al., 2019; Andersen and Jurowetzki, 2022).
4.1.3 Function 3 - Knowledge diffusion
Knowledge diffusion is in large parts driven by the establishment of industry associations, and for conferences, and other opportunities to share ideas and insights. For the EU EdTech industry, it is clear that the past decade have shown an emergence of industry associations and other affiliate organizations pushing for more and better EdTech in education institutions. While the UK are not part of the EU, they have a strong history as a leading region for the development and facilitation of EdTech in a European context. Since 2013, the EdTechX summit have been a central hub for the dissemination and diffusion of EdTech related information and news, and is still the most prominent cross-national meeting ground for startups, educators, and policymakers to discuss and deliberate EdTech developments in contemporary society. In the context of higher education, the European Commission (EC) have recently co-founded the European EdTech Network (EETN), to provide a platform for collaboration, knowledge development, and knowledge diffusion between educators, students, researchers, and entrepreneurs, for the prosperous development of a European higher education EdTech ecosystem.
4.1.4 Function 4 – Guidance of the search
The establishment of EETN highlights the strategic and regulatory goals of the EC and EU as a whole. Policymakers within the EU have a great interest in the development of a strong EdTech ecosystem. From a regulatory perspective, the EU have positive expectations for the development of higher education through technology and collaboration, with assumptions that innovations in EdTech can support overcoming some major challenges higher education is currently experiencing, such as allowing wider participation, removing barriers and making learning accessible, abundant and customizable for all.
4.1.5 Function 5 - Market formation
In general, the EU has a vested interest in the continued development of a quality higher education system within European borders, and especially since the outbreak of COVID-19, there have been an increasing interest in developing digital and novel technological solutions to the higher education space. Digital transformation is not exactly new, but recent developments have spurred the political and public interest in a European EdTech ecosystem. While there are no indications of tax schemes or fixed targets, the EC are involved in the establishment of an EdTech ecosystem, through funding of developing accelerators and incubators, and by collaborating closely with the EEA, representing the majority of countries and EdTech startups across the EU landscape.
4.1.6 Function 6 - Resource mobilization
 
Figure 2: Global EdTech funding (in billions $) - Including number of transactions pr. year (Brighteye Ventures, 2022)
The EU and the EC provide some economic opportunities for firms within the EU, but more importantly, there have been a significant influx of private equity moving into the European EdTech market in the past decade. From dedicated exchange-traded funds (ETF’s), venture capital firms, incubators and accelerators, EdTech startups have plenty of economic opportunity, as can be seen from figure 2 and 3. Increasingly, the market is becoming more competitive as it is being formed and shaped, and from existing reports on the European EdTech ecosystem, a clear increase in the amount
 
Figure 3: European EdTech funding (in billions $) - Including number of transactions pr. year (Brighteye Ventures, 2022)
invested in EdTech is reported. Further, the numbers indicate an early maturation of the market, as the number of deals is stagnating, while the amount invested is steadily
increasing.
4.1.7 Function 7 – Support from advocacy coalitions
In the past decade, a myriad of advocacy coalitions have sprouted in the European EdTech space. Both locally and more broadly, there is an increasing interest in developing support structures, incubators, and accelerators for EdTech startups aiming to enter the established educational institutions across the European landscape. To explore the characteristics of the support structures for higher education EdTech in the EU, SNA was utilized for two types of analysis. Firstly, the interactions between the identified advocacy coalitions is mapped, to establish any collaborative communities within the EU, and secondly, SNA will be utilized to map out and identify central incumbent firms, acting as supporting partners for the establishment of an EdTech ecosystem within the EU borders.
Communities of advocacy coalitions in the EU
In this analysis, there is an interest in identifying if there are communities among the advocacy coalitions spread across the EU landscape. More specifically, if there are countries or regions collaborating on EdTech development more rigorously than with other regions, to identify if there are key hubs for an actual European EdTech TIS, and not just a dispersed collection of countries or actors individually working with EdTech development. Here, a directed network of advocacy coalitions is generated based on their reported collaboration with other advocacy coalitions in the space, and an algorithm is applied to detect communities within the network.
From this network, two assumptions can be made. Firstly, there are decent indications of an established collaborative network, especially in the northern regions, with Scandinavian representatives collaborating more intensely together compared with the rest of the EU. Secondly, the major actors in continental Europe, France, Germany, and Spain, show a bigger tendency for local communities of EdTech development, with a relatively large ensemble of local advocacy coalitions, but less cross-country collaboration. in below figure 4, the distribution of communities is visualized.
 
Figure 4: Bipartite community network of industry organizations
Identifying incumbent firms in the space
For this analysis, a bipartite network between the industry associations and their partner firms is utilized to identify incumbent firms present in the development of an EdTech ecosystem across multiple regions and countries. As partner organizations, these firms are considered essential actors in the integration of startups and novel technologies in the existing infrastructure and general approaches to Education within the EU. Across the centrality measures implemented in this study, the most central actors are identified and outlined. The roles of these firms will be deliberated in the discussion section. A visualization of the Bipartite network can be seen in figure 5 below.
 
From the analysis, some firms consistently emerge as central actors in the development of an EU EdTech ecosystem, namely, Amazon Web Services (AWS), Samsung, and Microsoft. Among the incumbent firms participating in the development of a European EdTech ecosystem, there is a clear tendency towards companies providing software, hardware, or generally, services within the digital space, including Google, Hewlett Packard (HP) and Acer. Among the other central actors are venture capital funds (BrightEye Ventures), industry fairs and incubators (NetPort Science Park, Frankfurter EDU), and established EdTech firms (Sanoma, Its Learning, Tutory). Apart from visualizing central actors across the TIS, the SNA highlights how the advocacy coalitions across the EU often represent local networks of actors pushing for EdTech within EU regions and communities, and further, that municipalities and higher education institutions often play a central part within the smaller networks of advocacy coalitions.
5 Discussion and conclusion
By utilizing a functional TIS approach to mapping out the current landscape for the support structures of higher education EdTech in the EU, it is clear that the market is characterized by a fast-paced development across all indicators. The market is well funded, there is plenty of liquidity and general interest from funding agencies, venture capital funds, and other large economic players in the space. While the European Union is not directly funding any startups through tax schemes or similar, there are plenty of political incentives being established, and a formalized process of legitimizing an EU network of advocacy coalitions and cross-country collaborations. The EC have been vocal in the development of strategic goals for the implementation of EdTech to match overarching goals for the digitalization of institutions and infrastructure across the European landscape. Through EEA, there is now a formalized network of EdTech industry associations within the EU, and while some geographical areas are more tightly interwoven, there is a general incentive to integrating all interested EU membership countries in the emerging ecosystem of EdTech. Generally, EU regulations and incentives push for a positive development of an EdTech environment, and there are no cases of institutions or agencies, actively working against this development. There are some central concerns for the development of a digital ecosystem in the EU, where the General Data Protection Regulations (GDPR) have been a hindrance for some companies in the EdTech space. Similarly, the EU is currently developing a set of regulations aimed at Artificial Intelligence (AI), that will potentially impact some companies in the EdTech space. While these regulations can affect some companies in the short run, they are established to protect individual actors within the EU, and as such should not be perceived as negative, but rather as regulatory conditions for companies to navigate through.
In the context of higher education, there are strong indications of a mutual interest from industry and higher education institutions to enable a beneficial EdTech market, for instance, all the industry associations included in this study had ties with local universities, citing various forms of interactions in the development of an EdTech ecosystems, and for the development of a space for EdTech within higher education institutions. There is an emergent trend of close collaboration between industry associations, EdTech companies, researchers, and higher education institutions in the establishment of good practices for EdTech implementation, with some regions and local industry associations hosting co-creation programs, hackathons, and conferences between institutions and EdTech companies, to further the insights to what good EdTech is and should be in higher education. While still a relatively new trend, this tendency can be perceived as vital for the proper integration of EdTech in higher education, as the how’s and why’s of EdTech in higher education is yet to be fully understood and
established.
5.1 Conclusion and policy implications
In any TIS research, there is an expectancy of studies to provide policy implications, and ideally, some practical indications of what should be done to facilitate and cement the change processes enabled by the novel technologies. In general, this study concludes that there is positive and beneficial development of a European EdTech TIS for higher education, but that there is still a long way to go for (digital) EdTech to be fully integrated in the institutions of higher learning across the EU. Overall, the idea of EdTech in higher education is well received, but there are still plenty of uncertainties needed to be solved for a transition to be smooth. Primarily, it is still unclear what role EdTech plays in the existing flow of higher education. While it promises solutions to some very central issues experienced across higher education globally, for instance increase in students, easier availability, and enabling flexible and adaptive learning for an increasingly diverse student body, the role of EdTech is still relatively unclear. Much research indicates that technology should enhance the learning capability of the students, and enable educators to provide optimal learning environments to teach their subjects, but ultimately, universities and educators have, and probably should have, the final say in what constitutes ideal learning in the given environment. As such, it is unlikely that there is any one-size-fits-all solution, and establishing the best solutions across different faculties, and across different universities can be a long and costly process. In the current EdTech climate, most services provided by EdTech companies are SaaS, which can accumulate if universities hope to find optimal solutions through trial-and-error. While there are currently more than 2400 EdTech startups represented within Europe, universities often choose software providing broad functionality rather than specialized tools, simply because they do not have the time or resources to test all available solutions out there. While EdTech startups have experienced an increase in sources of funding, higher education institutions are more often than not looking to cut costs and limit their spending, so until there is a proper avenue for universities to evaluate EdTech solutions, all the funding in the world can’t secure the long-term viability of an EU higher education EdTech ecosystem. 
5.1.1 NOTES
Note on HE Value Chain: needs a paragraph based on reviews (saved in rev
folder), where? ideally maybe in the introduction/review highlighting the position of EdTech in the HE value chain.
(Spatial focus): Europe, while understanding the distinct differences in regions and countries within EU, this paper investigates EU from an overall perspective, to map the European landscape, under EU policy and regulations.
Should be based on purpose and goal of study, be clear in the analytical decisions, and argue for them. According to TIS, there is no right or wrong way to delineate analysis, but it has to fit the scope of the study.
Functions are the basis for TIS evaluation, identification of system weaknesses (or blocking mechanisms) and suggestions for how to remove these barriers. Politics and policy implications politics in the sense of “legitimation” for the development of regulation that supports market formation for emerging technologies, which lack legitimacy. — Lobbying from venture capitalists, reports from shareholders and interested parties, involvement and engagement from interestorganizations, etc.
Structural element of networks? - political and learning networks?
TIS perspective is primarily meso-level, thus putting less pressure and importance on micro-level insights.
TIS has a strong focus on actors (which is a core concept, just as political networks), it is rather straightforward to include strategies, positions, networks, coalitions etc. in the analysis. The insights gained from such studies can then be incorporated into comprehensive TIS studies
TIS scholars, so the argument goes, have to justify why a selected technology should be supported by policy. This critique is frequent, as the TIS framework is regularly applied to ‘clean’ technologies, which are – often implicitly – assumed to be socially desirable. Another issue is the specificity of policy recommendations. Bening et al. (2015) argue that many TIS studies make rather generic and broad policy recommendations. Instead, the authors call for workable policy recommendations. They argue that from their experience, policymakers prefer specific and substantiated recommendations for integration into the policymaking process
Central Findings: There is a clearly positive development of a European EdTech ecosystem. It is still an "emerging" technology in the sense that, while we have seen many developments, it is still unclear which technologies/solutions are most likely to succeed. There is currently more than 2400 EdTech startups within the EU. Even if the number for higher education EdTech is much smaller, it is still a larger number than what will likely be used in the future. While there are many positively engaged actors across the various perspectives of the ecosystem, a testing ground for EdTech is clearly needed in the Higher education space. While many universities have money for testing and running trials of new solutions, it is not feasible to expect universities to solve anything this way. There needs to be a platform or at least a foundation for what technologies should be in education, and how they should be implemented. This is not easily solvable through policy or other actions, but it is something research needs to explore and deliver a solution to how technologies and solutions can be tested in higher education, without students, educators, or EdTech companies suffering as a result. There is nothing wrong with a competitive market for EdTech, but it needs to fit with the overarching goals of haveing better, more affordable, and more approachable higher education institutions across the european landscape.
While some of these interest organizations have a longstanding history, most have emerged in the last five years, and increasingly, they establish collaboration not just locally, but across borders. In the higher education space, there are often relatively few customers per country, and it has been implied by some EdTech companies, that to ensure longterm survival, companies must reach outside their local borders
The deliberation and analysis of the six initial functions of the EU EdTech innovation system is based on insights from several central actors in the identified TIS. At the end of the analysis, table 7 provide a summary of these actors, and their roles in the
TIS. In the following section the last function, support from advocacy coalitions, is elaborated through SNA.
Table 7: Summary of central actors in the TIS
