5	Discussion
Based on our econometric analysis, we find a strong localization of AI adoption in few geographical, sectoral, and relational parts of the DACH economy. Our findings show similar patterns compared to what has been found in recent literature on the economics of AI (Acemoglu & Restrepo, 2020; Acemoglu et al., 2022; Rammer, 2022; Vannuccini & Prytkova, 2021) and to what Felten et al. (2021) show for the geographical US context. Going beyond rather descriptive statements, we can specify three different channels that are related to this localization in important ways.
First, we find that emulation pressures exhibit very high average marginal effects on the probability of AI adoption both on the regional and sectoral level. The relevance of these emulation pressures is generally in line with literature on inter-firm diffusion of other types of complex technologies (Battisti & Stoneman, 2003; Audretsch & Keilbach, 2007; Haller & Siedschlag, 2011), however, the magnitude of effects in the context of AI technology is of notice. This kind of environmental pressure to emulate the observed adoption behavior of others reaches firms through more indirect channels, detached from network structures. These effects may lead to so-called bandwagon adoption behavior emerging among firms that find themselves surrounded by higher rates of adoption, which has been witnessed for other types of much hyped technologies in the past (Gurbaxani, 1990; Kumar & Kumar, 1992).
Second,ourrelationalmeasurementsofnetworkpositionrevealthatAIadopterstendtobehighly interconnected within the AI knowledge network and that relevant social capital seems to be strongly associated with AI adoption. This relates to prior research such as Yli-Renko et al. (2001), who show thathigherlevelsofsocialcapitalinhigh-technologyfirmsleadtomoreknowledgeacquisition,which, in turn, leads to more technological distinctiveness. However, we also see that the average marginal effectsofbetweennesscentralityintheoverallfirmnetworkshowonlysmalleffectsontheprobability to adopt AI. Considered together with the slightly negative effects of the closeness centrality, it may point towards the fact that AI adopters don’t tend to take positions that allow the technology to easily spread throughout the entire firm network. Both of these findings indicate that AI adoption may currently mainly be happening in a closed system of selected actors. Based on the survey data, we detect a subtle statistical signal for the role of highly-skilled employees mediating the effects of embeddedness in the AI knowledge network, suggesting that network linkages may be fostered and leveraged by well educated employees that are better informed about their firm’s technological context. This adds to the findings for Rammer (2022) in the sense that human capital is not only needed in adopting AI for its know-how and skills, but specifically also for increasing the relational capacities of a firm to engage in facilitative co-operations.
Third, we find that the intensity of linkages connected to a firm is positively significant but relatively small compared to emulation pressures and network embeddedness. However, the intensity of linkages shows stronger effects on the probability of AI adoption when transmitting deep instead of superficial knowledge, as well as when increasing the link strength in terms of reciprocity. The contingencies of effects of direct inter-firm linkages, however, reveal interesting implications when considering that the other epidemic channels seem to strongly reinforce localization of AI knowledge. We find that the effects of direct linkages are very sensitive to the average proximity a company fosters to connected firms. Intuitively reasonable, we find that a closer cognitive proximity strongly moderates the positive effects of inter-firm linkages allowing the transmission of deep AI knowledge (Boschma, 2005; Sorenson et al., 2006). This implies that AI-related co-operations may be most successful when not merely looking for AI expertise, but specifically looking for expert co-operation partners in a related business context to facilitated the transfer of knowledge. This finding may be connected to the motivation of firms to engage in AI co-operations. In their report, Rammer (2022) find that the main objectives of these direct search efforts seek to absorb tacit knowledge such as experience in realizing AI-related projects, to deepen the technical expertise in AI-related skills (Alekseeva et al., 2021), and to leverage complementary skills to successfully apply AI in the specific use case of automation.
On the other hand, we also find counter-intuitive evidence in that geographical distance does not seem to facilitate these direct transmission in a positive way. This runs contrary to numerous studies proving the necessity of geographical proximity for the transmission of complex (technological) knowledge, may quickly decay over physical distance (Sorenson et al., 2006; Boschma & Frenken, 2010). Instead, we see high negative effects on the interaction between geographical distance and intensity of AI linkages on the probability to adopt AI. This indicates two things: First, we find that the transmission of deep AI knowledge seems to defy geographical distance. Second, alongside the descriptive picture of AI adoption hot-spots, we find that this expresses itself in the tendency of AI adopters to network with other regional AI hot-spots, albeit over geographical distance across the DACH region. For instance, an AI adopter in Munich may connect to other AI adopters regardless whether they are in the same region or other AI knowledge hot-spots across the DACH-region. These findings seem reasonable considering that the use of digital technologies mainly takes place in digital environments, where on-site interactions can be more easily replaced by online communication to facilitate knowledge sharing.
The characteristics we can assign to AI adopters in the German-speaking region based on our results are strikingly similar to a recent policy report on AI adoption among firms in Germany. For the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action (BMWK), Rammer (2022) find, on the basis of the German CIS data, that AI adoption is strongly and positively correlated with firm size and that increased rates of adoption can primarily be found in sectors of ICT services, financial services, as well as technical and scientific services. The reports also highlights, on the basis of a smaller survey of 546 AI adopters in Germany, the decisive role of AI-related co-operations as they find almost all surveyed AI adopting firms cooperate with other organizations holding expertise in AI. Remarkably, the results from our web-data are consistent with these descriptions, encouraging us to interpret our more comprehensive results to explain the diffusion of AI through epidemic effects based on largescale web-data.
5.1	Policy implications
The findings described can be used to develop special socio-political implications when considering AI technology policy from the two perspectives of generation (developing AI programs) and application (using AI-based solutions), and by considering their interrelation. Over the past years, national strategies for supporting competences in AI for the DACH countries, and Germany in particular, have followedaratherverticalapproachinsupportingspecificregionsinthedevelopmentofAItechnology (VanRoy etal., 2021). Many componentsofthe strategy and entailingpolicy instruments are designed to create local hubs of knowledge generation, including specific competence centers of excellence in AI research, innovation funding for specific sectors and geographical areas, as well as networking programs designed to connect actors within and between knowledge hubs (Van Roy et al., 2021). This strategy is following the European plan of a smart specialization strategy (S3), which seeks to promote technological diversification of regions with related capabilities (Foray, 2016). These strategies focus heavily on AI production, but have dedicated components aimed at public-private technology transfer and the support of entrepreneurial activities within these regions of excellence.
Our results show that AI adoption unfolds in close proximity to these hot-spots of AI production, aligning well with the geographical focal points of national AI strategies (especially around the RhineMain and greater Munich region, as well as Zurich in Switzerland and Linz/Salzburg and Vienna in Austria). However, the dissemination of AI technology does not appear to stray far from these localized sources of knowledge generation. Beyond epidemic hot-spots, large parts of the remaining geographic and relational space lack exposure to AI-relevant knowledge, which is in line with literature on cluster premiums that create favorable conditions for the production and diffusion of knowledge (Audretsch & Feldman, 1996; Baptista & Swann, 1998; Spencer et al., 2010). In their studies on the geography of AI based on occupations, Felten et al. (2021) also find strong patterns of geographical localization of AI knowledge and argue that "it is possible that a region’s exposure to AI generates tacit knowledge about how to work with and benefit from the technology that in turn constitutes a capability upon which future innovation will build" (p.2210). Against the backdrop of the socioeconomic implications of AI as a foundational technology carrying potential to impact productivity and rate of innovation across many industries and use cases, this raises concerns of creating pathways towards economic disparities. The diffusion patterns observed in this study supports some of the criticsm on S3-influenced policies as they tend to create cluster-based economic development that may disadvantage structurally weaker regions (Hassink & Gong, 2019) and cause technological lock-ins (Boschma & Frenken, 2010). Within clusters of AI adoption, early infections of knowledge may lead to virtuous cycles of knowledge spillovers through network effects (Sorenson et al., 2006), and are ultimately likely to affect performance of these selected firms in local hot-spots (Cassiman & Veugelers, 2002; Roper et al., 2017). Beyond cluster premiums emerging from co-location and virtuous cycles of local interactions, Broekel et al. (2015) show that exogenous policy interventions generally contribute additional premiums to firms located in innovative clusters as they are more likely to receive R&D subsidies and feature a stronger embeddedness in relevant R&D networks. This returns concerns about the current direction of AI technology policy:
While following a non-neutral strategy with regards to region and sectors (Foray, 2016) for supporting the production of a given technology may be warranted because it demands the presence of complex and related knowledge (Balland & Boschma, 2021), the diffusion of applications of this technology may need different types of policy instruments aimed at transcending local clusters. Overemphasizing the localization of the creation but also transfer of knowledge may lead to closed systems of adoption that exclude vast regions and sectors in the national economies. In that sense, following an S3 strategy for specific regions to move into AI is as sensible as proposing a few, specific regions to specialize in applying electricity, or using the internet for their local firms’ business purposes (Billón et al., 2008). This is not unique to the European context: Chowdhury et al. (2022) show that publicly supported AI projects in small businesses concentrate in regions with complementary AI research resources.
We may turn to literature on the design of innovation policy to offer some options to support the diffusion of AI technology. First, recalling the critique of production-oriented technology policy of Hahn and Yu (1999), they propose to couple these technology policies with diffusion-based incentive systems that motivate technology producers to engage in diffusion and dissemination activities. However, the question remains how these policies may transcend local clusters if production and application are closely linked. Chowdhury et al. (2022) suggest the establishment of geographically dispersed research centers, which has been formally added to the national AI strategy in the context of the US. However, especially concerning the DACH region, it is questionable to which degree other regions hold relevant related capabilities to establish AI research institutions of such excellency. In this context, one promising mechanism to escape localized technological lock-ins was recently described by Balland and Boschma (2021). They argue that the importance of inter-regional to spread technological knowledge is widely neglected in S3 policy, as well as in research on the geography of innovative technologies. They show that co-operations between regions that show a sufficient degree of relatedness in their activities can facilitate transfer of complex knowledge that helps less complex regions to diversify into more complex technologies. Although these are regionally aggregated measures that are neutral with respect to a specific technology, our results suggest that a similar mechanism is helpful in supporting the diffusion of AI technology among firms. As a sufficient degree of cognitive proximity between connected firms may facilitate the transfer of deep AI knowledge between them, geographical proximity does not seem to be a necessity to do the same. Pondering the case that a connection between cognitively proximate firms or communities of firms is infeasible to establish in some regions of the firm space, Janssen et al. (2020) show that cognitive proximity can be substituted by implementing systemic innovation intermediaries able to bridge cognitive distances between otherwise distant actors.
Overall,thesefindingssuggestthatamoredifferentiatedapproachindesigningtechnologypolicy may be warranted. On this note, Foray (2016) argues that S3-influenced policies are often impaired by the mistakes of governments to prioritize specific sectors in their entirety as opposed to designing support schemes on "a finer level of granularity" (p.6)—such as the firm-level, which may also help technology diffusion to transcend sectors by targeting support at high-potential adopters. The author describes another common mistake, which is that technology support programs for specific regions and sectors tend to be implemented and reinforced over longer periods of time, rather than being understood as a seed investment for actors in the regions to transition to a new technology.
Addressing the problem of long-term fixation can be a matter of both measurement and actions. In terms of measurements, this finely grained and dynamic process of realizing technology policy, of course, immediately returns questions on how to identify suitable (groups of) firms and how to monitor progress over shorter time frames. Based on the the analysis conducted in this study, we argue in favor of using modern web-based measurements as complements to more traditional and aggregated indicators to inform more dynamic employment of policy instruments. Traditional science and technology metrics have been criticized for mainly monitoring the landscape of inventions but not necessarily innovation and diffusion (Breznitz, 2021). A web-based approach offers the advantage of narrowing the unit of observation to the firm level without sacrificing aggregate comprehensiveness. These measurements offer scalability, speed and recency, especially compared to traditional innovation databases and data collection methods. Using web-scraping and language models, one can screen millions and more webpages vis-à-vis actual adoption and usage of technologies within a short time period, at any point of time, and without restrictions regarding update frequencies (Kinne & Axenbeck, 2020; Nathan & Rosso, 2022). Using hyperlink data, it is even possible to identify network positions of firms and potentially select promising candidate firms (or communities) that may help to accelerate thediffusionthroughtheinter-firmnetwork(Abbasiharoftehetal., 2021). Finally,they may be understood not as substitutes but complements. Our analysis has shown that when matched with basic firm-level data from more traditional, but well-tested databases, it remains possible to retain a broad sample while also identifying the heterogeneity of adopters and non-adopters, which may help policy instruments to target groups of firms more precisely.
In terms of the long-term fixation of policy schemes implemented to support technology development and diffusion Foray (2016), our evidence suggests that the support of training in the development of AI skills needed for adoption may be used as a potent seed investment towards AI adoption. This is echoed in recent literature documenting an increased demand for AI labor among firms otherwise predisposed (showing similar patterns firm characteristics compared to our findings) to adopt AI(Alekseevaetal.,2021).Referringtoourresultsproducedthroughanalyzingthesurveydata,wenot only show the significant effects of ICT experts present in AI adopting firms, but also find subtle signalsfortherelevanceofhigh-skilledhumancapitalinbuildingsocialcapitalrelevantfortheadoption of AI technology, hinting at the fact these seed investments may spur virtuous cycles of AI knowledge diffusion and, by association, AI adoption. However, investments into AI-specific education are unlikely to eventually blossom when undertaken in a vacuum void of related skills and activities, which is why the previous emphasis on inter-regional linkages (to AI hot-spots) remains crucial.
5.2	Managerial implications
The evidence on the effects of epidemic transmissions through different channels, which are related to AI adoption, carry relevant practical implications for managerial decision-makers. Managerial awareness may be paid to the type of knowledge sources reaching an organization and the channel through which it is received. This may determine the way in which this knowledge is processed within organizations, and which types of information are emphasized in adoption decisions. We argue that this, subsequently, may also determine the proficiency in employing the technology and expanding its use after initial adoption. In particular, our results call for managerial attention in two specific cases.
First,weshowthatindirectemulationpressuresemanatingfromafirm’senvironmentshowstronger effects on adoption than the intensity of direct linkages, that environmental pressures coming from the industrial sector are even amplified for firms that have low AI linkage intensities (and that the two transmissions channels are orthogonal in the regional case). This suggests that, for some firms, a central motivation to adopt AI is determined by so-called bandwagon behavior (Abrahamson & Rosenkopf, 1993)—firms adopting a technology due to herd mentality reinforced by positive feedback loops in the rate of adoption in local hot-spots. While this may be a rational decision to leverage positive externalities just as much as at it may be the mere result of social conformity, Lanzolla and Suarez (2012) show that this bandwagon behavior in adoption decisions may be resulting from the fact that different types of information are processed by different managerial levels within organizations. They argue that indirect emulation pressures are more likely to be received and absorbed by higher levels of managerial hierarchies that are not necessarily aligned with the technical expertise present on lower hierarchical levels of an organization. The authors argue that this, in turn, may determine the time it may take to progress from the initial moment of adoption to an intensive use of the technology. In some cases, misaligned motivations to adopt AI across managerial hierarchies may also create tensions and frustrations that may deter or impair organizations to effectively integrate the technology into company processes (Strang & Macy, 2001; Lanzolla & Suarez, 2012). As these emulation pressures are strong for selected firms in AI hot-spots, the decision to adopt AI technology may need to require reflexive and inclusive processes and practices across multiple hierarchical levels within the organization.
Second, we offer evidence on the positive effects of deep AI knowledge transmitted through direct linkages but also show how sensitive these effects are to contingent factors such as cognitive proximity and strength of linkages. This suggests a strong need for managerial attention in building up the right social capital and their abilities to search, acquire, assimilate and transform knowledge relevant to facilitate AI adoption. These multiple relations to AI adopters can provide trust and stability and hence offer reliability about this new technological knowledge (Uzzi, 1996; Smith & Papachristos, 2016), and in turn reduce uncertainty about this evolving technology. In addition, fostering direct linkages to sources of deep AI knowledge may be especially warranted when considering the possibility of emerging emulation pressures forcing adoption decisions on sub-optimal terms. Knowledge transmitted through direct linkages often is channeled through lower levels of managerial hierarchies and closer to the practical realities of a given firm (Strang & Macy, 2001; Lanzolla & Suarez, 2012).
Considering questions on how to draw and transcend the boundaries of the firm, search strategies to locate promising connections to facilitate AI adoption may be well advised to look confidently beyond a firm’s immediate geographical embedding. This is due to the fact that most firms are unlikely to find high adoption rates in their near vicinity, while our results suggest that fostering effective linkages over distance seems possible. Rather, firm’s should select co-operation partners based on a shared knowledge base that allows to transfer context-specific knowledge on AI applications. This is an important addition to reflect the reported motivations of fostering AI linkages as presented by Rammer (2022), as we show that merely connecting to sources of deep AI knowledge may neglect the importance of absorptive capacities of firms (Cohen & Levinthal, 1990) and that external knowledge should be compatible with the established knowledge base of a given firm (Laursen & Salter, 2006).
6	Limitations
Using nontraditional data sources to map new and emerging digital technologies with a lack of longitudinal depth naturally results in substantial limitations of our study. The two main concerns we would like to highlight relate to our novel measurement techniques and the conclusions we draw based on our econometric evidence. For what regards the former, our web-based measurements are bound to information presented on company websites and the presence of hyperlink connections established between firms. They rely on a firm‘s efforts, capabilities, and needs to advertise their usage oftechnology onits website. This raises concerns aboutwhether this would beofequal importanceto firmsfromdifferentsectors,sizeclasses,orregions(andotherfactorsinfluencingthecommunication strategyoffirms).Bearinginmindthatothertraditionalinnovationmetricsdonotcomewithoutsimilar baggage, we may address this caveat by pointing towards the geographic and sectoral distribution of our web-sample, which seems to carry external validity when comparing to other diffusion studies (Bresnahan, 2021; Acemoglu & Restrepo, 2020; Acemoglu et al., 2022; Vannuccini & Prytkova, 2021), and specifically also those conducted in the same region (Rammer, 2022). Although not directly variables of interest in our study, the effects we capture for basic firm characteristics and technological complementarities are in line with other recent AI adoption studies (Chen et al., 2021; DeStefano et al., 2022; Felten et al., 2021), further solidifying the validity of our data. Most importantly, our results for the core mechanisms of epidemic effects can be replicated based on a smaller and representative sample of Swiss firms. This firm-level survey data allows us to substitute our web-based indicator for a dependent variable based on self-reported usage of AI technology.
The second concern is connected to inference on the basis of our empirical strategy and crosssectionality of the data. We have been diligent in emphasizing that our model may be interpreted in a correlational, non-causal, manner. We believe that considering the correlative diffusion patterns revealed by our model offers many relevant implications for future theoretical and empirical research, as well as for policymaking, and provides important insights into reasoning of managerial decisionmakers. In our strategy for isolating effects of epidemic transmission channels, we have highlighted the potentially bi-directional nature of some variables. To limit concerns about simultaneity in modeling indirect emulation pressures, we make sure to exclude the focal firm in the computation of aggregate indicators. For our variables of direct transmissions, we construct an intensity variable which relativizes the absolute number of ties fostered to an intensive margin. However, endogeneity concerns are especially warranted for our way of testing the effects of embeddedness in the AI knowledge network on AI adoption by using the degree centrality in this network as a regressor in our estimations. Here, we are likely to face some degree of reverse causality, which is very common for homophilous behavior in social networks (Granovetter, 1985). Although we avoid causal conclusions, we suggest future research to leverage databases with growing longitudinal depth and more intricate network measures to address this issue. To motivate these endeavors and to add a pinch of exogeneity, we conduct a very simplistic test using the survey-based AIA indicator and the two waves of observations that were collected thus far. Appendix A.7.1 shows that when explaining AIA in time t using the lagged adoption indicator in addition to the sum of deep AI knowledge ties as explanatory variable, the interaction between these latter two variables is positively significant, providing an ever so slight indication that the delta in AI adoption over time correlates with network embeddedness.
This justifies performing sounder inference of causal effects in future research.
7	Conclusions
We set out to answer the question of when the adoption of artificial intelligence is contagious. Our findings suggest that patterns of diffusion of AI are strongly driven by epidemic network effects, but that they are heavily localized and predominant in narrow industrial branches and regions. This is particularly true for indirect emulation pressures emanating from the environment, but network measurements show that AI adoption also resembles a process of homophily in the inter-firm relational space. AI adoption seems to be contagious within a closed network of AI-related knowledge, where a stronger embeddedness in this networks is associated with an increased likelihood of AI adoption by individual firms. At the same time, these firms do not seem to assume central positions in the entire firm network but located on the edges of the network. This may be one explanation for the slow adoption rate on a macro-economic scale, as sources of AI knowledge are not positioned to facilitate diffusion of AI-related knowledge across the entire inter-firm network.
However, our results suggest a potential lever to transcend local clusters, as direct linkages between firms may transmit AI knowledge even over geographic distance. This transmission channel is intricate as it only unfolds its potential when specific conditions are met. Optimally, these include being linked to sources of deep, not superficial, AI knowledge; fostering a strong connection of reciprocal character; exhibiting a dedication to be exposed to a relatively high share of such sources; as well as selecting a sufficient number of linkages to firms that are cognitively similar.
Our findings carry important implications for practitioners and policy makers, as adoption activities seem to heavily concentrate in epidemic hot-spots, where diffusion dynamics facilitate and motivate AI adoption, whereas large parts of the remaining industrial landscape lack technological exposure and know-how. These dynamics may potentially create structural competitive disadvantages and economic inequality in the long-run. On the policy levels, this requires more finely grained efforts of monitoring the technology diffusion in industry using more dynamic and timely innovation metricssuchasweb-basedmeasurements,aswellasitrequiresdiffusion-orientedpolicyinstruments that set a more granular focus on individual clusters of firms, and potential incentive-mechanisms for diffusion activities. As AI adoption seems to be virtuously circulating in closed networks and does not seem to transmit well between clusters, AI policies may be specifically targeted at incentivizing linkages across disconnected clusters.
Given the nascence of applied AI in industry and prevailing uncertainty caused by the unresolved productivity paradox (Brynjolfsson et al., 2019), the strong predictive power of epidemic drivers of adoption also bears relevance for the current productivity paradox, as the adoption decision seems to be strongly driven by mere emulation, potentially outweighing dedicated considerations of investments and returns. We show that a spreading buzz around the technology has put pressure on firms exposed to it to adopt AI. In such cases, managerial reflexivity in making adoption decisions may be warranted to become aware of potential downsides of jumping on the bandwagon without consideration of firm-level competences. Brynjolfsson and Petropoulos (2021) argue that "technology investments must be combined with even larger investments in new business processes, skills, and other types of intangible capital before breakthroughs as diverse as the steam engine or computers ultimately boost productivity." Following Lanzolla and Suarez (2012), impacts on firm (innovation) performance may be path-dependent on the driving motives of the initial moment of adoption and through which organizational levels the technology entered an organization. This shows promising avenues for future research as the the different channels of knowledge transmissions through epidemic effects may be connected to the efficacy of implementing AI technology and developing its use from the initial moment of adoption to a level of intensive use.

