Continuations allow patentees in the United States to modify the scope of previous patents, leading to concerns about patent disputes generated by changes in patent boundaries. I show that continuations are litigated more often than original patents, even after controlling for patent and invention characteristics. I also exploit the pre-grant publication of patent applications and the timing of continuation grant to show that continuation grant increases litigation. The effect is stronger when the textual distance between the claims of a continuation and those of its original patent is greater, suggesting larger changes in scope lead to more disputes.

1	Introduction
The goal of the patent system is to encourage innovation by providing inventors a temporary right to exclude others from exploiting their inventions. However, patent infringement lawsuits in the U.S. have increased dramatically in the last 30 years (Marco et al., 2017), raising concern that excessive patent assertion may impose an implicit tax on innovators (FTC, 2003; GAO, 2013, 2016). Not only do these lawsuits have large direct costs, but they may also negatively affect investments in research and development, reduce startup funding, exacerbate innovators’ financing constraints, and influence the direction of innovation (Bessen and Meurer, 2012, 2013; Bessen et al., 2018; Cohen et al., 2019; Kiebzak et al., 2016; Lerner, 1995; Mezzanotti, 2021).
The growth in litigation has been associated with an increasing use of continuations (Righi and Cannito, 2021). Continuations are child applications that change the scope of previous patents by seeking new claims for the same technical content disclosed in their parent patent, while retaining the benefits of the parent’s filing date to assess patentability. On the one hand, continuations are valuable to patentees because, by delaying claim drafting, they are a tool for dealing with technological, commercial, or legal uncertainty. On the other hand, continuations are controversial because they increase the uncertainty of patent boundaries and allow patentees to write new claims targeting specific technologies developed by others after the original disclosure of an invention (Glazier, 2003; Graham, 2004; Graham and Mowery, 2004; Hegde et al., 2009; Lemley and Moore, 2004; Lemley and Shapiro, 2005; Righi and Simcoe, 2020). Moving patent boundaries may lead to more disputes.
Two reforms limited the abuses of continuations, in particular those related to submarine patents that surprise competitors and other inventors with lawsuits after a long pre-grant review. In 1995, the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) decreased the incentives to file long chains of continuations by shortening the term for patents with a long prosecution before grant. In 2000, the American Inventors Protection Act (AIPA) required the publication of utility patent applications 18 months after the filing date, reducing the possibility to surprise with new claims. However, concerns about the continuation practice have persisted. For example, two reports of the U.S. Federal Trade Commission discussed opportunistic uses of continuations to broaden patent scope, read on competitors’ products, and eventually assert patent rights (FTC, 2003, 2011). More recently, the Patent Public Advisory Committee of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) recommended further study of the effects of continuations in its 2020 Annual Report,  and, in a 2021 letter to the USPTO, the Food and Drug Administration expressed concern that continuations may increase litigation burdens. 
Although questions about the contribution of the continuation practice to the patent system often arise in recent policy debates, most of the evidence that continuations have higher litigation rates than original patents is based on data that pre-date TRIPS and AIPA (Allison et al., 2004; Lemley and Moore, 2004; Graham and Mowery, 2004). More recent evidence shows that the number of parent applications of a patent is positively correlated with the probability of a lawsuit (Marco and Miller, 2019), but isolating the effect of the continuation practice is challenging because patentees often use continuations to fine-tune the claims of more valuable patents, particularly before litigation, possibly leading to a spurious correlation between the use of continuations and the occurrence of lawsuits. Addressing this challenge is important to understand the impact of continuations on the patent system. In the first part of the empirical analysis of this article, I update the evidence on the link between continuations and patent disputes by comparing the litigation rates of continuations and original patents in the post-AIPA period. In the second part, I propose an empirical approach to estimate the effect of continuations on patent litigation. Throughout the analysis, I distinguish between the two types of continuations: continuation applications (CONs) and continuations-in-part (CIPs). A CON contains only new claims on the same technical content disclosed in its parent application, whereas a CIP also discloses additional technical content. Overall, I show that continuations, and in particular CONs, have likely fueled the recent patent litigation explosion.
For the first part of the analysis, I collect information on all continuations and original patents filed after AIPA came into effect and granted before 2018. In this sample, the probability of litigation of continuations is more than 5 times as large as the probability of litigation of original patents. To address concerns related to unobserved heterogeneity, and in particular that invention value may be related to both litigation and use of continuations, I estimate regression models controlling for a large set of patent characteristics, including patent family effects. Specifically, I exploit the fact that continuations often modify the scope of an already-granted parent patent that protects the same invention (Righi and Cannito, 2021), and I compare the probability of litigation of continuations and original patents within families, thereby controlling for all the common characteristics of parent and child patents, including invention value. Consistent with the idea that changing patent boundaries lead to disputes, the results show a robust positive association between CONs and litigation. Although CIPs are more likely to be litigated than original patents in simpler models, this result is not robust to the use of family effects, indicating that CIP’s higher litigation rates are driven by the characteristics of the original invention.
A causal interpretation of these results is problematic because the claims in continuations may be systematically different from those in original applications (for example because they cover uses of the invention that are more valuable) or may be tailored to a specific technology after a patentee has already decided to initiate a lawsuit. To address these challenges, in the second part of the analysis I again exploit the fact that continuations typically alter the scope of protection of an already-granted parent patent and leverage the pre-grant publication requirement of AIPA. Using the patent family as my unit of analysis, I estimate the impact of continuation grant reducing concerns about differences in value and strategic factors by using patents whose continuations are abandoned or are pending as a control group for those with continuations granted and exploiting the relationship between the timing of continuation grant and litigation of any claims in the family protecting an invention. The results of a set of duration models indicate that the litigation hazard increases by 46-62% after the grant of the first CON, and by 62-103% after the grant of the first CIP. On the one hand, the probability of litigation exhibits a marked jump immediately after the grant of the first CON, supporting the idea that CONs lead to more litigation. On the other hand, the litigation rates for inventions protected by CIPs are already higher before the grant of the first CIP, suggesting the estimated effect of CIPs is biased by unobserved heterogeneity.
As patentees can manipulate the speed of prosecution, one may be concerned that the timing of continuation grant is not exogenous. I address this concern with an instrumental variable design. Frakes and Wasserman (2021) show that changes over time in patent examiners’ granting proclivity are affected by the granting behavior of other examiners in the same art unit (a group of examiners working in a relatively homogeneous technical area). Building upon their work, and exploiting the fact that applications in a family are usually assigned to the same examiner but are disposed at different moments in time, I construct an instrument for continuation grant by using changes in the composition of USPTO art units. The results are similar to those in the previous analysis.
I conclude the analysis showing that the increase in litigation probability is larger when the textual distance between the claims granted in the continuations and those granted in the parent patent is greater. This result provides further support to the idea that continuations that expand patent scope in new technology areas or that surprise competitors with claims farther away in the technology space from those initially granted lead to more disputes.
This paper contributes to three areas of the literature on patents. First, previous empirical studies on patent litigation examined how differences in patent characteristics (Lanjouw and Schankerman, 2001; Lerner, 1994), ownership (Galasso et al., 2013; Simcoe et al., 2009), institutional environment (Henry and Turner, 2006; Palermo et al., 2019), or examination (Feng and Jaravel, 2020; Frakes and Wasserman, 2017; Marco and Miller, 2019) correlate with litigation. This article focuses on the relationship between the use of continuations and litigation. Allison et al. (2004), Lemley and Moore (2004), and Graham and Mowery (2004) show that continuations granted before TRIPS and AIPA came into effect have higher litigation rates than original patents. Marco and Miller (2019) show that longer priority chains are positively correlated with litigation. This paper goes beyond these studies by using more recent data and larger samples, controlling for heterogeneity across inventions, proposing an empirical approach to estimate the impact of continuation grant on litigation, and analyzing changes in claim language.
Second, this paper adds to the existing body of knowledge on strategic patenting (Cohen et al., 2000; Hall and Ziedonis, 2001; Levin et al., 1987; Ziedonis, 2004), and in particular on the use of continuations. Previous studies analyzed the use of continuations to delay patent grant, build a patent thicket for defensive purposes, protect pioneering inventions, and obtain standard essential patents (Graham, 2004; Hegde et al., 2009; Righi and Simcoe, 2020), but we know little about the impacts of continuations on the patent system. Frakes and Wasserman (2015) show that continuations are associated with distortions in the USPTO granting proclivity. This paper contributes to this strand of literature by providing evidence that the use of continuations leads to higher litigation rates.
Third, this paper complements existing research on patent scope, a primary lever in patent policy (Gilbert and Shapiro, 1990; Klemperer, 1990). Previous empirical work on patent scope analyzed determinants and impacts of the scope of protection provided by a single patent (Kuhn, 2016; Kuhn and Thompson, 2019; Lerner, 1994; Marco et al., 2019). However, patentees are increasingly using continuations to modify patent scope over time (Righi and Cannito, 2021). I show not only that changes in patent scope via continuations affect litigation, but also that this effect is stronger for greater changes in scope.


6	Conclusions
In the U.S., patentees can use continuations to change patent scope over time, generating uncertainty in patent boundaries that may lead to costly disputes. Although TRIPS and AIPA limited the most extreme forms of submarine patenting that involved the use of continuations, I show that continuations are still litigated more often than original patents. Patents from CONs, which just alter the scope of protection provided by previous patents without disclosing new technical content, are litigated at higher rates even after controlling for patent and invention characteristics that may drive both differences in prosecution and in the occurrence of lawsuits. Exploiting the pre-grant publication of applications and the timing of continuation grant, as well as using an instrumental variable design, I also show that continuations, and in particular CONs, lead to more litigation. The increase in litigation is higher when the claims in the continuations are more distant in the technology space from those in the original patent. This suggests that continuations that surprise other parties with larger changes in patent scope or are tailored to cover unexpected uses of an invention lead to more disputes.
Taken at face value, these results suggest that limiting the use of continuations, as the USPTO proposed in 2007, would probably decrease litigation and the related costs for the alleged infringers in terms of legal expenses, and, more generally, its negative impact on research investments and innovation. Moreover, the impact of continuations on patent disputes is probably larger than the one documented in this article, as litigation in district courts captures only the tip of the iceberg in patent conflicts. However, the overall effects of such a reform are not clear, because continuations may encourage investments in innovation in the first place by increasing the private returns to patents, especially in industries characterized by long lags between patent filing and commercialization. Furthermore, patentees may react to limits to the continuation practice by exploiting more intensively alternative tools, such as requests for continued examination or reissues. Further research is needed to understand how patentees employ the various tools to delay claim drafting and to quantify the costs and benefits of different patenting strategies.
Finally, continuations are a peculiarity of the U.S. patent system, but other jurisdictions provide similar ways to slow down prosecution, such as deferred examination or divisionals (Harhoff, 2016). This study therefore informs the debates on the implications of delays in prosecution in other countries, but more research is needed to analyze delays in claim drafting in other settings.


