The emergence of Non-Practicing Entities (NPEs) has significantly swayed patent market dynamics. With the recent development of the patent system and the fast advancement of technologies, the number of patents has increased, thus generating an exceptional flourishing of patent acquisitions. Consequently, this unprecedented patent market transition has given rise to the emergence of various new market players, of which NPEs are the most prominent in recent decades. Though NPEs first emerged in the American market for technologies, Europe has recently witnessed a rising presence of these actors. This research aims to study NPEs’ patent litigation activities in the European market for technologies linking together, in a novel way, the characteristics of NPEs’ asserted patents and the choice of the most favorable jurisdictions where to initiate patent infringement lawsuits (forum shopping). Our objective is to investigate the impact of heterogeneous European legal regimes (i.e. injunction-based vs. fee-based jurisdictions) on NPEs’ patent litigation strategies. We present evidence based on a comprehensive dataset of infringement actions based on patents filed at the European
Patent Office (EPO) and initiated in the five most NPEs’ targeted jurisdictions in Europe, namely
Germany, the U.K. (England and Wales), France, Italy, and The Netherlands, during the period
2007-2020. Our preliminary findings suggest that NPEs strategically adapt their litigation strategies, thus choosing a different legal regime according to specific patent quality characteristics.



1	Introduction
It is well acknowledged that the emergence of Non-Practicing Entities (NPEs) has significantly influenced patent market dynamics (Cheng et al., 2017). Traditional players in the patent market consist predominantly of operating companies (sometimes also referred to as producing entities, or PEs) that trade patented technologies for manufacturing end-products (Shrestha, 2010; Geradin et al., 2012). However, due to the development of the patent system and the fast advancement of technologies, the quantity of patents has generally increased, thus generating an unprecedented flourishing of patent trading. This evolution in the patent market has given rise to the emergence of various new market players, of which NPEs are the most prominent in recent decades (Cheng et al., 2017). Moreover, though NPEs first emerged in the American market for technologies, Europe has recently witnessed an increasing presence of these actors (Sterzi et al., 2020).
This research aims to study NPEs’ patent litigation activities in the European patent market linking together, in a novel way, the following two elements: (i) the characteristics of the patents asserted by NPEs, and (ii) the choice of the jurisdiction where NPEs initiate the patent infringement lawsuit - motivated by the opportunity of choosing the most favorable jurisdiction where to assert their patent rights, the so-called phenomenon of "forum shopping" (Thumm et al., 2016). More specifically, our objective is to extend previous contributions regarding NPEs’ patent litigation activities in Europe (Graham and Van Zeebroeck, 2013; Love et al., 2016; Orsatti et al., 2018; Sterzi et al., 2020), and to investigate whether the heterogeneous legal regimes characterizing European countries (i.e. injunction-based vs. fee-based regimes) influence NPEs’ patent litigation strategies. We present evidence based on a comprehensive dataset of infringement actions based on patents filed at the European Patent Office (EPO) and initiated in the five major patent litigation systems in Europe: Germany, the UK (England and Wales), France, The Netherlands, and Italy during the period 2007–2020.
2	Literature Review
During the last decade, increased opportunities for patent monetization have resulted in the rise of institutions facilitating the sale and the assertion of patents in Europe (Thumm et al., 2016). New licensing firms, such as patent aggregators, and more generally NPEs, have become quite influential and controversial in the industries they touch, sparking heated debates about the economic role they play in the patent system and their effects on innovation dynamics (Feldman and Ewing, 2012; Orsatti et al., 2018). In particular, while NPEs’ activity is already well established and widely acknowledged in the US patent system, this phenomenon has recently started to grow in the European patent market as well. However, only a limited number of scholars have investigated this increasingly present patent market actors (Fusco, 2013; Love et al., 2016; Sterzi et al., 2020;
Thumm et al., 2016).
In fact, there is evidence that NPEs presence started to spread in Europe due to a recent combination of court decisions and legislative changes occurred in the US, which weakened some of the key leverages that
NPEs used to rely on when trying to monetize their patents (Sterzi et al., 2020).  Taking a closer look at the European patent market, in the last few years the emergence of the following patterns can be observed: (i) a growing number, and share, of litigation cases against European companies, both in and outside Europe, are initiated by NPEs, (ii) an increasing number of European patents have been acquired by NPEs, and the trend is confirmed by recent patent acquisitions (Sterzi et al., 2020).
Another important feature to be taken into account when considering the European patent market is the existence of substantial differences across jurisdictions, especially in terms of caseloads, case outcomes and legal regimes. With respect to the number of cases processed every year, for example, it is well acknowledged that German courts hear by far the largest number of cases (Cremers et al., 2017; Darts-IP, 2018). Moreover, Germany presents the specificity of a bifurcated patent litigation systems, where claims of infringement and validity are decided independently of each other in separate court proceedings and at different courts (Cremers et al., 2016). Another key aspect is the fact that a considerable number of patents filed at the EPO are litigated across multiple European countries, and thus in different litigation systems with their own set of rules: this practice is also referred to as "forum shopping" and it is a common NPEs’ strategy across European countries since it maximizes NPEs’ monetization opportunities (Graham and Van Zeebroeck, 2013; Cremers et al., 2017).
Finally, a crucial feature for the comparison of NPEs’ litigation strategies is the existence of different legal regimes among European countries. In particular, with respect to the courts’ attitude in patent litigation lawsuits in imposing either injunction restrictions or damage compensations, two regimes can be identified: 1) the fee-based regime, in which liability rule is applied, and 2) the injunction-based regime, in which property rule is applied (Brander and Spencer, 2021). Indeed, in the fee-based regime, the court grants a per-unit license fee, or royalty, normally equal to the marginal value of the patented innovation (Brander and Spencer, 2021). Instead, in the injunctive regime, the court imposes an injunction relief, forcing the infringing firm to stop using the patented technology, and eventually leaving the parties free to negotiate.
3	Motivation & Hypothesis
The recent global patent wars within the ICT industry, including the increased involvement of NPEs, have shown the potential for patent litigation to become a disruptive force with respect to product market competition and innovation (Helmers and McDonagh, 2013). Many PAEs are alleged to do little more than accumulate minor patents and initiate predatory lawsuits (Brander and Spencer, 2021), moreover, in acquiring and then asserting patents, NPEs target businesses that already use (at least allegedly) the patented technology. Therefore, NPE activity results in what often are referred to as ex post patent transactions (Ramirez, 2014), since any patent license or settlement occurs after someone has developed or marketed the product at issue. This contrasts with ex ante patent transactions in which the technology and related patent rights transfer from an inventor to a manufacturer before the product is developed and marketed (FTC, 2011). The fact that NPEs’ activities facilitates ex post (as opposed to ex ante) patent transactions has raised policy questions about the role of NPEs, and other non-practicing patent holders, in promoting innovation and economic growth (Ramirez, 2014).
In light of the growing interest of NPEs for the European market for technologies and the impact of their patent litigation activities on European producing entities, our research aims to investigate the relationship between the quality of the litigated patents and the specific legal regimes of the countries in which NPEs choose to assert those intellectual property rights. In fact, engaging in patent litigation in Europe is increasingly becoming cross-jurisdictional and litigants are faced with uncertainty and challenges triggered by the different “rules of the game” of infringement proceedings (Graham and Van Zeebroeck, 2013): the European litigation environment is indeed fragmented, since several countries follow different procedural rules, and are subject to different levels of trial. Among the most affected European countries in terms of NPEs litigations, U.K. and France tend to be less prone to file injunction restrictions compared to Italy and Germany (Cremers et al., 2017; Tochtermann, 2019). For example, English courts, on the basis of their equity law tradition, tend not to grant patent injunctions and they favor fee-based reliefs. Similarly, French courts tend to often grant compulsory licenses and damages awards to the winning party in infringement cases resolutions (Cremers et al., 2017; Cotter, 2019), while an injunction in patent infringement cases is more easily obtained in Italy of Germany. With respect to Germany, preliminary injunction is granted precisely because of Germany’s bifurcated system: German courts grant injunctions before hearing whether a patent is valid (Helmers and McDonagh, 2013), since validity and injunction are heard is separate courts.
Drawing from Brander and Spencer (2021),  our research explores the relationship between NPEs’ choice over a specific European jurisdiction (which can be either injunction-based or fee-based) where to assert IP rights and the quality of these asserted patents. Given the heterogeneous European legal framework which gives NPEs the opportunity to forum shopping - we expect to observe NPEs asserting low-quality patents in injunctive regimes and high-quality patents in fee-based regimes. More precisely, for low-quality patents, a regime of injunction relief gives the patent holder a strong bargaining power in negotiations with the infringing firm since, in case of an injunction decision, the NPE would suffer a lower relative loss than the infringing firm since the letter faces a disruptive effect on its production and investment efforts. On the contrary, for high-quality patents, NPEs have more to lose from an injunction in terms of foregone license fees, since the former would have been able to negotiate with the infringing firm a licensing agreement for the high quality technology.
That is, our hypothesis is that NPEs choose to strategically litigate low-quality patents in countries in which the injunctive regime applies (Germany and Italy), while high-quality patents tend to be asserted in regimes where injunctive regime is not the practical rule (UK and, to a lesser extent, France).


6	Conclusions
The results obtained can be summarized as follows:
•	The estimated effect of an increase in the overall quality of the patent (proxied by the number of 5-year forward citations) on the probability of being asserted in a fee-based regime, such as France and the U.K, (vs. an injunction-based regime, such as Germany and Italy) is positive and significant for NPEs, while it is non-significant for PEs.
•	The estimated effect of an increase in incrementality of the patent (captured by the number of backward citations) on the probability of being asserted in a fee-based regime, such as France and the U.K, (vs. an injunction-based regime, such as Germany and Italy) is negative and significant for NPEs, while it is non-significant for PEs.
The effect of an increase in patent age is somewhat counter-intuitive, since we would have expected a negative relationship between an increase in patent age and the probability of being asserted in a fee-based regime if the plaintiff is an NPE. However, in order to refine our analysis, better proxies of NPEs’ bargaining power will be taken into account in the development of this analysis, such as: the size of the plaintiff’s patent portfolio, the number of patents litigated and technological fields. Other variables we will include are, for example, the country of the defendant and litigation costs, the latter in particular seem to play a key role in directing NPEs’ choices as well (Helmers and McDonagh, 2013).
To conclude, our preliminary results are in line with our hypothesis, even if some limitations has to be tackled yet, such as the lack of more reliable regressors to control for the bargaining power of the plaintiff. In our regression models we tried to address this issue by including plaintiffs fixed effects. However, a better proxy for future developments could be the size of the plaintiff’s patent portfolio or the the number of initiated litigations, together with a more detailed analysis of the technical fields involved (e.g. complex vs. discrete technologies) and the country of the defendant. Nonetheless, our results provide a first empirical evidence in support of the predictions of the theoretical model proposed by Brander and Spencer (2021).
