Litigating against competitors over patent infringement is an integral part of the patent enforcement strategy of firms. An inherent challenge for plaintiff firms is to evaluate the risk/return trade-offs involved in letting a patent litigation case reach the trial stage of the litigation process compared to settling or withdrawing the case before it reaches trial. We reason that the decision to let a case go to trial is not just a matter of legal and technological considerations, but reflects the confidence of a plaintiff’s CEO about whether the heightened risk of handing the decision over to a judge or jury is justified by the additional returns of a positive outcome. We draw on mechanisms from the literature on CEO confidence and integrate them into theoretical models explaining the risk/return considerations of plaintiffs in patent litigation. We predict that the level of CEO overconfidence increases the likelihood for their firms’ decisions to let a patent litigation case go to trial. Furthermore, we isolate the overconfidence mechanism by exploring two moderations that define conditions under which risks and potential returns of patent cases are amplified at the case and the firm level. We predict that the effect of CEO overconfidence is stronger when (a) patents are involved in the litigation that are not yet granted and (b) the firm is financially constrained. We find empirical support analysing a unique dataset of 871 US public firms, 1123 different CEOs and 2634 patent infringement litigations in the US between 2003-2018. 

1. INTRODUCTION 
Litigation over patent infringement is a core enforcement strategy for firms trying to capture the returns from their intellectual property rights (IPR) (Somaya, 2003; Yang, 2019). It is a powerful threat by patent owning firms (plaintiffs) against the potential unauthorized use of their technologies by competitors (defendants) because courts could ultimately rule that defendants have to pay damages, stop using the technologies in question and/or suffer from injunctions that restrict the sale of their products (Cook, 2020; Somaya, 2012; Yang, 2019). Extant research on patent infringement litigation has found that this threat is so effective that the vast majority of cases are settled before they reach the trial stage (Cook, 2020). The dominant explanations for these settlements are the substantial legal expenses involved in defending a case in trial (Cook, 2020) and the risk of undesirable outcomes for plaintiffs (e.g. leakage of confidential information, negative implications of losing a case for the entire patent portfolio and strategy of the plaintiff) when a decision is beyond the control of a firm, with judges or juries  being in charge of making the judgement (Awate & Makhija, 2021; Yang, 2019). While most patent litigation cases never reach the trial stage, there is a substantial number of cases (8413 cases from 1987 to 2018 in the US) that eventually reach the trial stage (Darts-IP, 2021). However, our theoretical understanding for the conditions under which CEOs are confident to let a case go all the way to a trial has not been considered in the literature to date. 
In this study, we focus on the distinct nature of patent litigation in general and the trial stage in particular. Litigation is inherently different from the pre-litigation private settlement of patent disputes between firms because it enters the public record (Bittlingmayer, 1988; Fischer & Henkel, 2012; Galasso, 2012; Grindley & Teece, 1997; Leiponen & Delcamp, 2019; Lin, 2011; Shapiro, 2000). Litigation shapes the reputation of plaintiffs with regards to the quality of their technology management, capability to enforce their technology, and vision of their technology’s potential. This information affects a wider audience, such as investors, regulators, customers, employees and the public at large (Yu & Shih, 2021). These perceptions are often times amplified by the media coverage that they receive (Tan, 2016). For example, the announcement of California’s San Jose court in 2012 that Apple was awarded US$1 billion in compensation from Samsung caused an almost 5% decrease of Samsung’s stock price, while the one of Apple increased by 2% (BBC, 2012; Nam et al., 2015; Paik & Zhu, 2016). We reason that a court decision carries more weight than merely filing for litigation because the courts are independent, external parties that can verify or dismiss a plaintiff’s case with wide ranging signalling effects for other competitors. Within our reasoning, the decision to let a case go to trial is no longer just a matter of legal and technological considerations which occur earlier in the litigation process, but reflect the confidence of a plaintiff’s CEO about whether the heightened risk of handing the decision over to a judge or jury is justified by the additional risks for a negative outcome. Hence, we draw mechanisms from the literature on CEO confidence and integrate them into theoretical models explaining the risk/return considerations of plaintiffs in patent litigation. 
Based on this theory integration, we hypothesize that the level of CEO overconfidence (Chen et al., 2015; Heavey et al., 2022; Hirshleifer et al., 2012) increases the likelihood for their firms’ decisions to let a patent litigation case go to trial. Apart from the main effect, we explore two moderating factors which can help isolate the overconfidence mechanisms because they define conditions under which risks and potential returns of patent cases are amplified at the case and the firm level. More specifically, we predict that the effect of CEO overconfidence on the decision to let a case reach the trial stage is stronger when (a) patents are involved in the litigation that are not yet granted and (b) the firm is financially constrained. 
Our theorising based on two research streams in patent enforcement literature and overconfidence theory which have remained largely disconnected so far. The patent enforcement literature focuses the patent litigation strategy of firms and particularly a plaintiff’s decision to file a patent infringement litigation case (Somaya, 2012; Talvela & Kässi, 2019; Yang, 2019). The literature identified the role of CEOs in decisions to file patent infringement litigations (Reitzig, 2007; Somaya, 2016) however, this discussion hardly touches on the CEO decision making after the filing of a patent litigation case and the difficult in evaluating and predicting the higher risk and higher return trade-offs of deciding to let a patent case reach the trial stage (Cook, 2020; Yu & Shih, 2021). Overconfidence theory suggests that overconfident CEOs will overestimate the potential gains and underestimate the risk exposure when evaluating and predicting the strategic outcomes make their evaluations (Heavey et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2016; Malmendier & Tate, 2005). However, while the effect of overconfidence on the risk taking of CEOs is well documented, its effect on decisions to let a 
patent litigation case reach the trial stage is hardly understood. 
We test our theoretical predictions for all patent infringement litigation cases which were filed between 2003 to 2018 in the US. To test our theoretical predictions, we create a unique data set by merging the firm and CEO level information from BoardEx database with patent infringement case information obtained from the Darts-IP patent litigation database. By doing so, we obtain a sample of 2634 patent infringement litigation cases with 871 US based firms as plaintiffs and 1123 CEOs between 2003 and 2018. We estimate Cox proportional hazard rate models for the decision to let a case reach the trial stage. All of our hypotheses are supported by the estimation results.  
This study makes two contributions to the literature. First, our focus on CEO characteristics and their decisions to let patent infringement litigation cases reach the trial stage and not settle or withdraw a case is useful within a broader stream of research that explains the distinct theoretical mechanisms related to patent enforcement (Paik & Zhu, 2016; Somaya, 2012; Talvela & Kässi, 2019; Yang, 2019). Theory on patent enforcement is incomplete when not considering the role of CEO characteristics in the high risk/return conditions of deciding to let a case go to trial determine the patent litigation strategy of firms. Our theoretical reasoning linking CEO overconfidence levels and patent litigation can be extended to broader activity domains in which patent strategic actions are undertaken such as acquiring or licensing patents (Somaya, 2012).  
Second, our research focus on CEOs’ personal traits’ effect on decisions to let patent infringement litigation cases reach the trial stage overcomes the narrow focus of overconfidence literature. Previous confidence and overconfidence literature are limited in firms’ general strategies such as the investment, market entry, etc. (Cain et al., 2015; Heavey et al., 2022; Malmendier & Tate, 2005), which implicitly assumes that CEO characteristics and the confidence levels of CEOs would not matter for decisions on patent enforcement. We isolate the overconfidence mechanisms (Heavey et al., 2022) by two moderating effects on the 
CEOs’ trial decision further explains the reliable of CEO overconfidence’s effect and deeply involvement of personal traits’ in the patent enforcement. Our theoretical reasoning of involvement of overconfident CEOs can be explored to other CEO traits and the board members’ characters’ effect on the patent enforcement process. 


6 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION  
In conclusion, we raise a theoretical model to explain the CEO’ overconfidence level influence firms’ decision to send the patent litigation cases to the trial process, and explain the mechanisms that overconfidence CEOs’ effect by importing cases’ pending patent ratio and firms’ financial constraints two moderating boundaries. We hypothesise that CEOs’ 
overconfidence level increases the likelihood of the patent litigation cases reach the trial stage. And this effect is stronger if the pending patent ratio is comparably higher in the litigation case, while the effect is weaker when CEOs are facing comparably fewer financial constraints. The empirical results confirm all of our hypotheses.  
Our findings offer two important theoretical implications. First, we argue the specific patent litigation trial decision as an important strategy in the patent enforcement literature. Prior scholars more focus on the high cost of litigation so regard filing a litigation is to threat infringers for a better settlement and CEOs are avoid send their cases to the trial stage  (Somaya, 
2012; Yang, 2019). However, the CEOs’ performance during the patent litigation process is 
not always negative and there are still substantial cases enters trial stage. Following this stream, it is valuable for future research to further explore other factors may determine the patent litigation cases’ trial decision, like some external factors such as the market competition, and some internal factors such as the firm level strategies, and so on. It is also attractive to explore if the other sequential stage’s strategic actions after filing a case such as the appeal court, 
negotiation during the discovery stage, etc.  
Second, our research broadens the application scope of CEOs’ personalities to the patent enforcement area. To be specific, CEOs are deeply involved in the patent enforcement process that the enforcement strategies are influenced by CEOs’ personal traits. Our testing of the two moderators integrated from the overconfidence mechanism helps to verify the overconfident CEOs are involved in the patent litigation trial decision making process, and the mechanisms are reliable. This breaks the prejudice that the patent enforcement decision is determined by firm condition and patents’ value (Somaya, 2003). Following this stream, we encourage future research can expand our study by introducing more other CEO traits and the board members’ characters to the patent enforcement literature to help understand the involvement of CEO in the patent enforcement process.   
Finally, our results also have managerial implications for various parties. First, firms’ board can take overconfidence as the assessment criterion when they consider the CEO candidates. Firms may predict their possibility to get involved in the patent litigation trial by evaluating the CEO candidates. Second, the other firms in the market may take the CEOs’ overconfidence level into consideration when they are making decisions of patent related issues. To avoid the confrontation in court with such firms, other firms may develop a more complex patent portfolio or alliance in this technological area to avoid the possible patent litigation lawsuit. 
Third, it is also an appropriate criterion for investors when they are evaluating firms’ risktaking capability and the possibility to get involved into risky events. As a very costly activity, the patent litigation trial strategy deserves a strong consideration for investors.  
It would be helpful for understanding if we have direct evidence from the plaintiff’s side about their decision-making process by interview or other qualitative research that the CEOs’ involvement in the patent litigation process and how the final decisions are made. Our research is limited by secondary data that we don’t have such direct evidence of the decision-making process. Future research can improve our research by involving the direct evidence that CEO make the patent litigation trial decision. Second, limited to the secondary data we only include public S&P firms in our sample. But we don’t know if the overconfident CEOs’ influence can be expanded to private firms, SME, start-ups. Therefore, we suggest further research can test our hypotheses with different categories of firms. Third, the litigation cases and CEOs in our sample are in the US patent regime. We do not know if CEO behaviour would differ when litigating in different countries with different patent regimes. For countries and regions have different law, different regulation, different culture, different regimes, we don’t know how the overconfident CEOs will affect (Papageorgiadis & Sofka, 2020).  We encourage future research can explore our theoretical arguments with different patent regimes.  
